The British
Medical Association
ILLUSTRATED
MEDICAL
DICTIONARY
Essential A每Zquick reference
to over 5,500 medical terms
CORONARY ARTERY
Superior 
vena cava
Inferior 
vena cava
Descending
aorta
Pulmonary
veins
Coronary 
vein
Left 
anterior
descending
artery
Right 
main
coronary
artery
Left
circumflex
artery
Left main 
coronary
artery
Aorta
coronary Any structure that encircles like
a crown. The term usually refers to the
coronary arteries encircling the heart. It is
also sometimes used as a nonmedical
term for a heart attack (see  myocardial
infarction).
coronary artery Either of the 2 main
arteries that supply the tissues of the
heart with oxygen-rich blood. These 
arteries, known as the left and right main
coronary arteries, arise directly from the
aorta. The term coronary artery is also
applied to any of the arteries that branch
off from the main coronary arteries, such
as the left circumflex artery and the left
anterior descending artery. Blockage of a
coronary artery as a result of  athero-
sclerosis can lead to myocardial infarction.
(See also coronary artery disease.)ILLUSTRATED
MEDICAL
DICTIONARY
The British 
Medical Association
A Dorling Kindersley BookA
4
abdomen The region of the body be-
tween the chest and the pelvis. The
abdominal cavity is bounded by the ribs
and diaphragm above, and by the pelvis
below, with the spine and abdominal
muscles forming the back, side, and
front walls. It contains the liver, stom-
ach, intestines, spleen, pancreas, and
kidneys. In the lower abdomen, enclosed
by the pelvis, are the bladder, rectum,
and, in women, the uterus and ovaries.
abdomen, acute Persistent, severe ab-
dominal pain of sudden onset, usually
associated with spasm of the abdomi-
nal muscles, vomiting, and fever.
The most common cause of an acute
abdomen is  peritonitis. Other causes
include  appendicitis, abdominal injury,
perforation of an internal organ due to
disorders such as peptic ulcer or diver-
ticular disease. Acute abdominal pain
commonly begins as a vague pain in the
centre but then becomes localized.
An acute abdomen requires urgent
medical investigation that may involve
a  laparoscopy or a  laparotomy. Treat-
ment depends on the underlying cause.
abdominal pain Discomfort in the ab-
domen. Mild abdominal pain is common
and is often due to excessive alcohol
intake, eating unwisely, or an attack of
diarrhoea. Pain in the lower abdomen 
is common during menstruation but is
occasionally due to a gynaecological
disorder such as  endometriosis. Cystitis
is a common cause of pain or discom-
fort in the abdomen. Bladder distension
as a result of urinary obstruction may
also cause abdominal pain. 
Abdominal colic is pain that occurs
every few minutes as one of the internal
organs goes into muscular spasm in an
attempt to overcome an obstruction
such as a stone or an area of inflamma-
tion. The attacks of colic may become
more severe and may be associated
with vomiting (see abdomen, acute).
Peptic ulcer often produces recurrent
gnawing pain. Other possible causes of
abdominal pain are infection, such as
pyelonephritis, and  ischaemia (lack of
blood supply), as occurs when a volvu-
lus (twisting of the intestine) obstructs
blood vessels. Tumours affecting an
abdominal organ can cause pain. Abdo-
minal pain can also result from anxiety.
For mild pain, a wrapped hot-water
bottle is often effective. Pain due to
peptic ulcer can be temporarily relieved
by food or by taking  antacid drugs.
Abdominal pain that is not relieved by
vomiting, persists for more than 6 hours,
or is associated with sweating or faint-
ing requires urgent medical attention.
Urgent attention is also necessary if
pain is accompanied by persistent vom-
iting, vomiting of blood, or passing of
bloodstained or black faeces. Unex-
plained weight loss or changes in bowel
habits should always be investigated.
Investigation of abdominal pain may
include the use of imaging tests such as
ultrasound scanning, and endoscopic
examination in the form of gastroscopy,
colonoscopy, or laparoscopy.
abdominal swelling Enlargement of
the abdomen. Abdominal swelling is a
natural result of  obesity and growth of
the uterus during pregnancy. Wind in the
stomach or intestine may cause uncom-
fortable, bloating distension of the
abdomen.Some women experience ab-
dominal distension due to temporary
water retention just before menstrua-
tion. Other causes may be more serious.
ABDOMEN ABDOMINAL SWELLING
A
Stomach
Area of
abdomen
Liver
Large
intestine
ABDOMEN
Small
intestine
Rectum5
For instance,  ascites (accumulation of
fluid between organs) may be a symp-
tom of cancer or disease of the heart,
kidneys, or liver; swelling may also be
due to intestinal obstruction (see intes-
tine, obstruction of) or an ovarian cyst.
Diagnosis of the underlying cause may
involve  abdominal X-rays,  ultrasound
scanning, laparotomy, or laparoscopy. In
ascites, some fluid between organs may
be drained for examination.
abdominal thrust A first-aid treatment
for choking, in which sharp upward pres-
sure is applied to the upper abdomen
to dislodge a foreign body obstructing
the airway. The technique is also known
as the Heimlich manoeuvre.
abdominal X-ray An X-ray examina-
tion of the abdominal contents. X-rays
can show whether any organ is enlarged
and can detect swallowed foreign bod-
ies in the digestive tract. They also show
patterns of fluid and gas: distended
loops of bowel containing fluid often
indicate an obstruction (see  intestine,
obstruction of); gas outside the intestine
indicates intestinal perforation. 
Calcium, which is opaque to X-rays, is
present in most kidney stones (see
calculus, urinary tract) and in some
gallstones and aortic  aneurysms; these
can sometimes be detected on an
abdominal X-ray. 
abducent nerve The 6th cranial nerve.
It supplies the lateral rectus muscle of
each eye, which is responsible for mov-
ing the eyeball outwards. The  nerve
originates in the pons (part of the brain-
stem) and passes along the base of the
brain, entering the back of the eye socket
through a gap between the skull bones. 
abduction Movement of a limb away
from the central line of the body, or of a
digit away from the axis of a limb. Mus-
cles that carry out this movement are
called abductors. (See also adduction.)
ablation Removal or destruction of dis-
eased tissue by excision (cutting away),
cryosurgery (freezing), radiotherapy, dia-
thermy (burning), or laser treatment. 
abnormality A physical deformity or
malformation, a behavioural or mental
problem, or a variation from normal in
thestructure or function of a cell, tis-
sue, or organ in the body.
ABO blood groups See blood groups.
abortifacient An agent that causes abor-
tion. In medical practice, abortion is
induced using  prostaglandin drugs,
often given as vaginal pessaries.
abortion In medical terminology, either
spontaneous abortion (see miscarriage)
or medically induced termination of
pregnancy (see abortion, induced).
abortion, induced Medically induced
termination of pregnancy. Abortion may
be performed if continuation of the
pregnancy would risk the woman＊s life,
if the mental or physical health of the
woman or her existing children is at
risk, or if there is a substantial risk of
handicap to the baby. 
Depending on the stage of pregnancy,
termination may be induced by using
drugs or by the surgical technique of
vacuum suction curettage, under either
a general or local anaesthetic, during
which the fetal and placental tissues are
removed. Complications are rare.
abrasion Also called a graze, a wound
on the skin surface that is caused by
scraping or rubbing.
abrasion, dental The wearing away of
tooth enamel, often accompanied by the
erosion of dentine (the layer beneath
the enamel) and cementum (the bone-
like tissue that covers the tooth root),
usually through too-vigorous brushing.
Abraded areas are often sensitive to
cold or hot food or drink, and a desensi-
tizing toothpaste and/or protection with
a bonding (see bonding, dental) agent or
filling may be needed.
abreaction In  psychoanalysis, the pro-
cess of becoming consciously aware of
repressed (buried) thoughts and feelings.
In Freudian theory, abreaction ideally
occurs by way of catharsis.
abscess A collection of pus formed as a
result of infection by microorganisms,
usually bacteria. Abscesses may develop
in any organ and in the soft tissues
beneath the skin in any area. Common
sites include the armpit, breast (see
breast abscess), groin, and gums (see
abscess, dental). Rarer sites include the
liver (see  liver abscess) and the brain
(see brain abscess).
Common bacteria, such as staphylo-
cocci, are the usual cause of abscesses,
ABSCESS ABDOMINAL THRUST
AAn abscess in a periodontal pocket can
usually be treated by the dentist scrap-
ing away infected material.
absence In medical terms, a temporary
loss or impairment of consciousness
that occurs in some forms of  epilepsy,
typically generalized absence (petit
mal) seizures in childhood.
absorption The process by which flu-
ids or other substances are taken up by
body tissues. The term is commonly
applied to the uptake of the nutrients
from food into blood and lymph from
the digestive tract. The major site of
absorption is the small intestine, which
is lined with microscopic finger-like
projections called villi (see  villus). The
villi greatly increase the surface area of
the intestine, thereby increasing the
rate of absorption. 
acanthosis nigricans A rare condition
in which thickened dark patches of skin
appear in the groin, armpits, neck, and
other skin folds. The condition may
occur in young people as a genetic dis-
order or as the result of an endocrine
disorder such as Cushing＊s syndrome. It
also occurs in people with carcinomas
of the lung and other organs. 
Pseudoacanthosis nigricans is a much
more common condition, usually seen
in dark-complexioned people who are
overweight. In this form, the skin in fold
areas is both thicker and darker than the
surrounding skin, and there is usually
excessive sweating in affected areas. The
condition may improve with weight loss.
6
although fungal infections can cause
them, and  amoebae are an important
cause of liver abscesses (see  amoebia-
sis). Infectious organisms usually reach
internal organs via the bloodstream, or
they penetrate tissues under the skin
through a wound.
An abscess may cause pain, depending
on where it occurs. Most larger absces-
ses cause fever, sweating, and malaise.
Those that are close to the skin often
cause obvious redness and swelling.
Antibiotics, antifungal drugs, or amoe-
bicides are usually prescribed as
appropriate. Most abscesses also need
to be drained (see drain, surgical), and
in some cases a tube may be left in
place to allow continuous drainage.
Some abscesses burst and drain spon-
taneously. Occasionally, an abscess
within a vital organ damages enough
surrounding tissue to cause permanent
loss of normal function, or even death.
abscess, dental A pus-filled sac in the
tissue around the root of a tooth. An
abscess may occur when bacteria
invade the pulp (the tissues in the cen-
tral cavity of a tooth) as a result of
dental caries, which destroys the tooth＊s
enamel and dentine, allowing bacteria
to reach the pulp. Bacteria can also gain
access to the pulp when a tooth is
injured. The infection in the pulp then
spreads into the surrounding tissue to
form an abscess. Abscesses can also
result from periodontal disease, in which
bacteria accumulate in pockets that
form between the teeth and gums. 
The affected tooth aches or throbs,
and biting or chewing is usually
extremely painful. The gum around the
tooth is tender and may be red and
swollen. An untreated abscess eventu-
ally erodes a sinus (channel) through
the jawbone to the gum surface, where
it forms a swelling known as a gumboil.
As the abscess spreads, the glands in
the neck and the side of the face may
become swollen, and fever may develop.
Treatment may consist of draining the
abscess, followed by  root-canal treat-
ment of the affected tooth, but in some
cases  extraction of the tooth is neces-
sary.  Antibiotics are prescribed if the
infection has spread beyond the tooth.
ABSCESS, DENTAL ACANTHOSIS NIGRICANS
A
Enamel
Dentine
Blood
vessel
Abscess
Nerve
Jawbone
Decay
ABSCESS, DENTAL
Pulp
Gumacarbose A drug that is used to treat
type 2  diabetes mellitus. Acarbose acts
on enzymes in the intestines, inhibiting
the digestion of starch and therefore
slowing the rise in blood glucose levels
after a carbohydrate meal. 
accessory nerve The 11th cranial nerve.
Unlike the other cranial nerves, most of
the accessory nerve originates from the
spinal cord. The small part of the nerve
that originates from the brain supplies
many muscles of the palate, pharynx
(throat), and larynx (voice box). Damage
to this part of the nerve may cause diffi-
culty in speaking and swallowing. The
spinal part of  the nerve  supplies large
muscles of the neckand back, notably
the sternomastoid and trapezius. Dam-
age to the spinal fibres of the nerve
paralyses these muscles.
accidental death Death that occurs as
a direct result of an accident. A high pro-
portion of deaths in young adults,
particularly among males, are acciden-
tal. Many of these deaths are due to
road traffic accidents, drowning, or drug
overdose. Falls in the home and burning
or asphyxiation due to fire are common
causes of accidental death in elderly
people. Fatal accidents at work have
become less common with the intro-
duction of effective safety measures.
accommodation Adjustment, especially
the process by which the eye adjusts
itself to focus on near objects. At rest,
the eye is focused for distant vision,
when its lens is thin and flat. To make
focusing on a nearer object possible,
the ciliary muscle of the eye contracts,
which reduces the pull on the outer rim
of the lens, allowing it to become thicker
and more convex.
With age, the lens loses its elasticity.
This makes accommodation more and
more difficult and results in a form of
longsightedness called presbyopia.
acebutolol A beta-blocker drug used to
treat hypertension, angina pectoris, and
certain types of arrhythmia in which the
heart beats too rapidly.
ACE inhibitor drugs A group of vaso-
dilator drugs used to treat heart failure,
hypertension, and diabetic nephropathy.
ACE (angiotensinconverting enzyme) in-
hibitors are often prescribed with other
drugs such as  diuretic drugs or  beta-
blocker drugs. Possible side effects
include nausea, loss of taste, headache,
dizziness, and dry cough.
acetaminophen An  analgesic drug
more commonly known as paracetamol.
acetazolamide A drug that is used in
the treatment of  glaucoma and, occa-
sionally, to prevent or treat symptoms
of  mountain  sickness. Possible adverse
effects include lethargy, nausea, diar-
rhoea, and impotence.
acetic acid The colourless, pungent, org-
anic acid that gives vinegar its sour
taste. In medicine, acetic acid is an
ingredient of antiseptic gels that are
used for certain vaginal infections.
acetylcholine A type of  neurotransmit-
ter (a chemical that transmits messages
between nerve cells or between nerve
and muscle cells). Acetylcholine is the
neurotransmitter found at all nerve-
muscle junctions and at many other
sites in the nervous system. The actions
of acetylcholine are called cholinergic
actions, and these can be blocked by
anticholinergic drugs.
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors A
group of drugs that are used in the
treatment of mild to moderate dementia
due to  Alzheimer＊s disease, in which
there is a deficiency of the neuro-
transmitter  acetylcholine  in the brain.
ACETYLCHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS ACARBOSE
A
7
Light rays from
near object
Flattened
lens
Point of
focus
Rounded
lens bends
the light
Point of
focus
Ciliary
muscle
ACCOMMODATION
DISTANT FOCUS NEAR FOCUS
Light rays from
distant object
Ciliary
muscle8
Drugs such as donepezil and rivastig-
mine work by blocking the action of
acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme in the
brain responsible for the breakdown of
acetylcholine. This raises acetylcholine
levels, and, in half of all patients, the
drugs slow the rate of progression of
dementia. They have no effect on
dementia due to other causes, such as
stroke or head injury, however. Com-
mon side effects include nausea,
dizziness, and headache. Rarely, diffi-
culty in passing urine may occur.
acetylcysteine A drug used in the treat-
ment of paracetamol overdose and as a
mucolytic drug to loosen sputum. When
the drug is taken in large doses, vomiting
or rash may occur as rare side effects.
achalasia A rare condition of unknown
cause in which the muscles at the lower
end of the oesophagus and the sphinc-
ter (valve) between the oesophagus and
the stomach fail to relax to let food into
the stomach after swallowing. As a
result, the lowest part of the oesopha-
gus is narrowed and becomes blocked
with food, while the part above widens.
Symptoms include difficulty and pain
with swallowing and pain in the lower
chest and upper abdomen.
A barium swallow (a type of  barium 
X-ray examination) and gastroscopy may
be performed to investigate achalasia.
Oesophageal dila-
tation allows the
oesophagus to be
widened for long
periods. Surgery to
cut some of the
muscles at the sto-
mach entrance may
be necessary.
Achilles tendon
The tendon that
raises the heel.
The Achilles ten-
don is formed from
the calf muscles
(gastrocnemius,
soleus, and plan-
tar muscles) and
is attached to the
calcaneus (heel-bone). Minor injuries to
the Achilles tendon are common and
can result in inflammation (tendinitis).
Violent stretching of the tendon can
cause it to rupture; in such cases, surgi-
cal repair may be necessary.
achlorhydria Absence of stomach acid
secretions. This may be due to chronic
atrophic  gastritis or to an absence or
malfunction of acid-producing parietal
cells in the stomach lining. Achlorhydria
may not produce symptoms but is asso-
ciated with  stomach cancer, however,
and is a feature of pernicious anaemia
(see anaemia, megaloblastic).
achondroplasia A rare genetic disor-
der of bone growth that leads to  short
stature. The condition is caused by a
dominant gene (see  genetic disorders)
but often arises as a new mutation. The
long bones  of the arms and legs are
affected mainly. The cartilage that links
each bone to its epiphysis (the growing
area at its tip) is converted to bone too
early, preventing further limb growth.
Those affected have short limbs, a well-
developed trunk, and a head of normal
size except for a protruding forehead.
aciclovir An  antiviral drug that can be
taken by mouth, used topically, or given
intravenously to reduce the severity of
viral infections including herpes simplex
and  herpes zoster. Local adverse reac-
tions commonly occur after topical use.
Other side effects are uncommon but
can include nausea and vomiting.
acid A substance defined as a donor of
hydrogen ions (hydrogen atoms with
positive electrical charges). Acid molec-
ules, when mixed with or dissolved in
water, split up to release their con-
stituent ions; all acids release hydrogen
as the positive ion. (See also acid每base
balance; alkali.)
acid每base balance A combination of
mechanisms that ensures that the body＊s
fluids are neither too acid nor too alka-
line (alkalis are also called bases). 
The body has three mechanisms for
maintaining normal acid每base balance:
buffers, breathing, and the activities of
the kidneys. Buffers are substances in
the blood that neutralize acid or alka-
line wastes. Rapid breathing results in
the blood becoming less acidic; slow
breathing has the opposite effect. The
kidneys regulate the amounts of acid or
alkaline wastes in the urine. 
ACETYLCYSTEINE ACID每BASE BALANCE
A
Calf
muscle
Achilles
tendon
ACHILLESTENDON
Heel9
Disturbances of the body＊s acid每base
balance result in either acidosis (exces-
sive blood acidity) or alkalosis (excessive
blood alkalinity). 
acidosis A disturbance of the body＊s
acid每base balance  in which there is an
accumulation of acid or loss of  alkali
(base). There are 2 types of acidosis:
metabolic and respiratory.
One form of metabolic acidosis is
ketoacidosis, which occurs in uncon-
trolled  diabetes mellitus and starvation.
Metabolic acidosis may also be caused
by loss of bicarbonate (an alkali) as a
result of severe diarrhoea. In kidney fail-
ure, there is insufficient excretion of
acid in the urine. 
Respiratory acidosis occurs if breathing
fails to remove enough carbon dioxide
from the lungs. The excess carbon di-
oxide remainsin  the bloodstream,
where it dissolves to form carbonic acid.
Impaired breathing leading to respira-
toryacidosis may be due to chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (see pul-
monarydisease,  chronic obstructive),
bronchial asthma, or airway obstruction.
acid reflux Regurgitation of acidic fluid
from the stomach into the  oesophagus
due to inefficiency of the muscular valve
at the lower end of the oesophagus.
Also known as gastro-oesophageal
reflux disease (GORD), acid reflux may
inflame the oesophagus, resulting in
heartburn due to  oesophagitis. It may
occur in pregnancy and often affects
overweight people. 
acne A chronic skin disorder caused by
inflammation of the hair follicles and
sebaceous glands in the skin. The most
common type is acne vulgaris, which
almost always develops during puberty.
Acne spots are caused by the obstruc-
tion of hair follicles by sebum (the oily
substance secreted by the sebaceous
glands). Bacteria multiply in the follicle,
causing inflammation. The change in
sebum secretion at puberty seems to be
linked with increased levels of androgen
hormones (male sex hormones).
Acne may be brought on or aggravated
by drugs such as  corticosteroids  and
androgens. Exposure to certain chemi-
cals and oils in the workplace can also
cause a type of acne.
Acne develops in areas of skin with a
high concentration of sebaceous glands,
mainly the face, centre of the chest,
upper back, shoulders, and around the
neck. Milia(whiteheads), comedones
(blackheads), nod-
ules (firm swel-
lings beneath the
skin), and cysts
(larger, fluid-filled
swellings) are the
most commonly
occurring spots.
Some, particularly
cysts, leave scars
after they heal.
There is no inst-
ant cure for acne,
but washing the
affected areas at
least twice daily
may help to keep
it under control.
Topical drug treat-
ments, such as benzoyl peroxide or
retinoic acid, unblock the pores and
promote healing. Ultraviolet light can
be beneficial. If topical treatment has
failed, oral drug treatment with  anti-
biotics, hormones, or isotretinoin may be
given. Acne improves slowly over time,
often clearing up by the end of the
teenage years. 
acoustic nerve The part of the vestibu-
locochlear nerve (the 8th  cranial nerve)
that is concerned with hearing. It is also
known as the auditory nerve.
acoustic neuroma A rare, noncancer-
ous tumour arising from supporting
cells that surround the 8th cranial nerve
(see  acoustic nerve), usually within the
internal auditory meatus (the canalin
the skull through which the nerve pass-
es from the inner ear to the brain).
Usually, the cause of an acoustic neuro-
ma is unknown. However, tumours that
affect the nerves on both sides of the
head simultaneously may be part of a
condition known as  neurofibromatosis.
Acoustic neuroma can  cause  deafness,
tinnitus, loss of balance, and pain in the
face and the affected ear.
Diagnosis is made by hearing tests fol-
lowedby X-rays, CT scanning, or MRI.
Surgery may be needed, but treatment
ACOUSTIC NEUROMA ACIDOSIS
A
Pus
Plug
ACNE SPOT
ACNE
Hair
Sebaceous
gland
Inflamed skin10
with radiotherapy to shrink the tumour
is also effective.
acrocyanosis A circulatory disorder in
which the hands and feet turn blue, may
become cold, and sweat excessively.
Acrocyanosis is caused by spasm of the
small blood vessels and is often aggra-
vated by cold weather. It is related to
Raynaud＊s disease. 
acrodermatitis enteropathica A rare
inheriteddisorder in which areas of the
skin (most commonly the fingers, toes,
scalp, and the areas around the anus
and mouth) are reddened, ulcerated, and
covered with  pustules. Acrodermatitis
enteropathica is due  toan inability to
absorb enough zinc from food. Zinc
supplements usually help.
acromegaly A rare disease characterized
by abnormal enlargement of the skull,
jaw, hands, feet, and also of the internal
organs. It is caused by excessive secre-
tion of  growth hormone from the
anterior pituitary gland at the base of
the brain and is the result of a pituitary
tumour. A tumour that develops before
puberty results in  gigantism. Acromeg-
aly is diagnosed by measuring blood
levels of growth hormone, followed by
CT scanning or MRI.
acromioclavicular joint The joint that
lies between the outer end of the  cla-
vicle (collarbone) and the acromion 
(the bony prominence at the top of the
scapula (shoulderblade). 
acromion A bony prominence at the
top of the scapula (shoulderblade). The
acromion articulates with the end of 
the  clavicle (collarbone) to form the
acromioclavicular joint.
acroparaesthesia A medical term used
to describe tingling in the fingers or
toes (see pins-and-needles).
ACTH The common abbreviation for
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (also
called corticotrophin). ACTH is produced
by the anterior pituitary gland and stim-
ulates the adrenal cortex (outer layer of
the  adrenal glands) to release various
corticosteroid hormones, most impor-
tantly hydrocortisone (cortisol) but also
aldosterone and androgen hormones.
ACTH production is controlled by a
feedback mechanism involving both the
hypothalamus and the level of hydro-
cortisone in the blood. ACTH levels
increase in response to stress, emotion,
injury, infection, burns, surgery, and
decreased blood pressure.
A tumour of the pituitary gland can
cause excessive ACTH production which
leads to overproduction of hydrocorti-
sone by the adrenal cortex, resulting in
Cushing＊s syndrome. Insufficient ACTH
production results in decreased produc-
tion of hydrocortisone, causing low
blood pressure. Synthetic ACTH is occa-
sionally given by injection to treat
arthritis or allergy. 
actin A  protein involved in muscle con-
traction, in which microscopic filaments
of actin and another protein, myosin,
slide in between each other.
acting out Impulsive actions that may
reflect unconscious wishes. The term is
most often used by psychotherapists 
to describe behaviour during analysis
when the patient ※acts out§ rather than
reports fantasies, wishes, or beliefs.
Acting out can also occur as a reaction
to frustrations encountered in everyday
life, often taking the form of antisocial,
aggressive behaviour.
actinic Pertaining to changes caused by
the ultraviolet rays in sunlight, as in
actinic  dermatitis (inflammation of the
skin) and actinic  keratosis (roughness
and thickening of the skin). 
actinomycosis An infection caused by
ACTINOMYCES ISRAELII  or related actino-
mycete bacteria. The most common
form of actinomycosis affects the jaw
area. A painful swelling appears and
pus discharges through small openings
that develop in the skin. Another form
ACROCYANOSIS ACTINOMYCOSIS
A
Acromioclavicular
joint
Acromion
ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT
Clavicle
Humerus
Scapula11
of actinomycosis affects the pelvis in
women, causing lower abdominal pain
and bleeding between periods. This
form was associated with a type of IUD,
no longer in use, that did not contain
copper. Rarely, forms of the disorder
affect the appendix or lung. Actinomy-
cosis is treated with antibiotics.
acuity, visual See visual acuity.
acupressure A derivative of  acupunc-
ture in which pressure is applied
instead of needles.
acupuncture A branch of Chinese med-
icine in which needles are inserted into
a patient＊s skin as therapy for various
disorders or to induce anaesthesia.
Traditional Chinese medicine main-
tains that the chi (life-force) flows
through the body along channels called
meridians. A blockage in one or more of
these meridians is thought to cause ill
health. Acupuncturists aim to restore
health by inserting needles at appropri-
ate sites along the affected meridians.
The needles are stimulated by rotation
or by an electric current. Acupuncture
has been used successfully as an anaes-
thetic for surgical procedures and to
provide pain relief after operations and
for chronic conditions. 
acute A term often used to describe a
disorder or symptom that develops sud-
denly. Acute conditions may or may not
be severe, and they are usually of short
duration. (See also chronic.)
Adam＊s apple A projection at the front
of the neck, just beneath the skin, that
is formed by a prominence on the thy-
roid cartilage, which is part of the larynx
(voice box). The Adam＊s apple enlarges
in males at puberty. 
ADD The abbreviation for attention defi-
cit disorder, more commonly known as
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
addiction Dependence on, and craving
for, a particular drug, for example alco-
hol, diazepam (a tranquillizer), or heroin.
Reducing or stopping intake of the drug
may lead to characteristic physiological
or psychological symptoms (see  with-
drawal syndrome), such as tremor or
anxiety. (See also  alcohol dependence;
drug dependence.) 
Addison＊s disease A rare chronic dis-
order in which there is a deficiency of
the corticosteroid hormones hydrocorti-
sone and aldosterone, normallyproduced
by the adrenal cortex  (the outer part of
the  adrenal glands). Excessive amounts
of ACTH are secreted by the pituitary
gland in an attempt to increase output
of the corticosteroid hormones. Secre-
tion and activity of another hormone,
melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH),
is also increased.
Addison＊s disease can be caused by
any disease that destroys the adrenal
cortices. The most common cause is an
autoimmune disorder in which the
immune system produces antibodies
that attack the adrenal glands. 
Symptoms generally develop gradu-
ally over months or years, and include
tiredness, weakness, abdominal pain,
and weight loss. Excess MSH may cause
darkening of the skin in the creases of
the palms, pressure areas of the body,
and the mouth. Acute episodes, called
Addisonian crises, brought on by infec-
tion, injury, or other stresses, can also
occur.  The symptoms of these include
extreme muscle weakness, dehydration,
hypotension (low blood pressure), con-
fusion, and coma. Hypoglycaemia (low
blood glucose) also occurs.
Life-long  corticosteroid drug  treatment
is needed. Treatment of Addisonian
crises involves rapid infusion of saline
and glucose, and supplementary doses
of corticosteroid hormones.
adduction Movement of a limb towards
the central line of the body, or of a digit
towards the axis of a limb. Muscles that
carry out this movement are often called
adductors. (See also abduction.)
adenitis Inflammation of  lymph nodes.
Cervical adenitis (swelling and tender-
ness of the lymph nodes in the neck)
occurs in certain bacterial  infections,
especially  tonsillitis, and glandular fever
(see  infectiousmononucleosis).  Mesen-
teric lymphadenitis is inflammation of
the lymph nodes inside the abdomen
and is usually caused by viral infection.
Treatment of adenitis may include anal-
gesic drugs, and antibiotic drugs if there
is a bacterial infection.
adenocarcinoma The technical name
for a cancer of a gland or glandular tis-
sue, or for a cancer in which the cells
ADENOCARCINOMA ACUITY, VISUAL
A12
form gland-like structures. An adeno-
carcinoma arises from epithelium (the
layer of cells that lines the inside of
organs). Cancers of the colon, breast,
pancreas, and kidney are usually adeno-
carcinomas, as are some cancers of the
cervix, oesophagus, salivary glands, and
other organs. (See also intestine, cancer
of; kidney cancer; pancreas, cancer of.)
adenoidectomy Surgical removal of the
adenoids. An adenoidectomy is usually
performed on a child with abnormally
large adenoids that are causing recur-
rent infections of the middle ear or air
sinuses. The operation may be perfor-
med together with tonsillectomy.
adenoids A mass of glandular tissue at
the back of the nasal passage above the
tonsils. The adenoids are made up of
lymph nodes, which form part of the
body＊s defences against upper respira-
tory tract infections; they tend to
enlarge during early childhood, a time
when such infections are common. 
In most children, adenoids shrink after
the age of about 5 years, disappearing
altogether by puberty. In some children,
however, they enlarge, obstructing
breathing and blocking the eustachian
tubes, which connect the middle ear to
the throat. This results in recurrent
infections and deafness. Infections usu-
ally respond to  antibiotic drugs, but if
they recur frequently, adenoidectomy
may be recommended.
adenoma A noncancerous tumour or
cyst that resembles glandular tissue
and arises from the epithelium (the
layer of cells that lines the inside of
organs). Adenomas of  endocrine glands
can cause excessive hormone produc-
tion, leading to disease. For example,
pituitary gland adenomas can result in
acromegaly or Cushing＊s syndrome.
adenomatosis An abnormal condition
of glands in which they are affected
either by  hyperplasia (overgrowth) or
the development of numerous adenomas
(noncancerous tumours). Adenomato-
sis may simultaneously affect 2 or more
different endocrine glands. 
ADH The abbreviation for antidiuretic
hormone (also called vasopressin), which
is released from the posterior part of
the pituitary gland and acts on the kid-
neys to increase their reabsorption of
water into the blood. ADH reduces the
amount of water lost in the urine and
helps to control the body＊s overall water
balance. ADH production is controlled
by the  hypothalamus. Various factors
can affect ADH production and thus dis-
turb the body＊s water balance, including
drinking alcohol, the disorder  diabetes
insipidus, or a major operation.
ADHD The abbreviation for  attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder.
adhesion The joining of normally uncon-
nected body parts by bands of fibrous
tissue. Adhesions are sometimes pre-
sent from birth, but they most often
develop as a result of scarring after
inflammation. Adhesions are most com-
mon in the abdomen, where they often
form after  peritonitis (inflammation of
the abdominal lining) or surgery. Some-
times, loops of intestine are bound
together by  adhesions, causing intesti-
nal obstruction (see intestine, obstruction
of). In such cases, surgery is usually
required to cut the bands of tissue. 
adipose tissue A layer of fat just
beneath the skin and around various
internal organs. Adipose tissue is built
up from fat deposited as a result of
excess food intake, thus acting as an
energy store; excessive amounts of adi-
pose tissue produce obesity. The tissue
insulates against loss of body heat and
helps absorb shock in areas subject to
sudden or frequent pressure, such as
the buttocks of feet. 
In men, superficial adipose tissue accu-
mulates around the shoulders, waist,
ADENOIDECTOMY ADIPOSE TISSUE
A
Tonsils
Pharynx
ADENOIDS
Tongue
Adenoids
Nasal cavity
Opening of
eustachian
tube13
and abdomen; in  women, it occurs on
the breasts, hips, and thighs.
adjuvant A substance that enhances
the action of another substance in the
body. The term is usually used to des-
cribe an ingredient added to a  vaccine
to increase the production of antibodies
by the immune system, thus enhancing
the vaccine＊s effect. Adjuvant chemother-
apyis the use of  anticancer drugs in
addition to surgical removal of a tumour.
Adlerian theory The psychoanalytical
ideas set forth by the Austrian psychia-
trist Alfred Adler. Also called individual
psychology, Adler＊s theories were based
on the idea that everyone is born with
feelings of inferiority. Life is seen as a
constant struggle to overcome these
feelings; failure to do so leads to neuro-
sis. (See also psychoanalytic theory.)
adolescence The period between child-
hood and adulthood, which broadly
corresponds to the teenage years. Ado-
lescence commences and overlaps with,
but is not the same as, puberty.
ADP The abbreviation for adenosine di-
phosphate, the chemical that takes up
energy released during biochemical reac-
tions to form  ATP (adenosine triphos-
phate), the body＊s main energy-carrying
chemical. When ATP releases its energy,
ADP is reformed. (See also metabolism.)
adrenal failure Insufficient production
of hormones by the adrenal cortex (the
outer part of the adrenal glands). It can
be acute or chronic. Adrenal failure may
be caused by a disorder of the adrenal
glands, in which case it is called Addi-
son＊s disease, or by reduced stimulation
of the adrenal cortex by ACTH, a hor-
mone produced by the pituitary gland. 
adrenal glands A pair of small, trian-
gular  endocrine glands  located above
the kidneys. Each adrenal gland has 
2 distinct parts: the outer cortex and the
smaller, inner medulla.
The cortex secretes aldosterone, which,
together with hydrocortisone and cor-
ticosterone and small amounts of
androgen hormones  helps to maintain
blood pressure. Hydrocortisone controls
the body＊s use of fats, proteins, and car-
bohydrates and is also important in
helping the body to cope with stress.
Hydrocortisone and corticosterone also
suppress  inflammatory reactions and
some activities of the  immune system.
Production of adrenal cortical hor-
mones is controlled by ACTH, which is
produced in the pituitary gland.
The adrenal medulla is part of the
sympathetic  autonomic nervous system.
In response to stress, it secretes the
hormones adrenaline (epinephrine) and
noradrenaline  (norepinephrine), which
increase heart-rate and blood flow.
adrenal gland disorders A range of
uncommon but sometimes serious dis-
orders due to deficient or excessive
production of hormones by one or both
of the adrenal glands.
A genetic defect causes congenital
adrenal hyperplasia, in which the ad-
renal cortex is unable to make sufficient
hydrocortisone and  aldosterone, and
androgens are produced in excess. In
adrenal failure, there is also deficient
production of hormones by the adrenal
cortex; if due to disease of the adrenal
glands, it is called  Addison＊s disease.
Adrenal tumours are rare and generally
lead to excess hormone production.
In many cases, disturbed activity of
the adrenal glands is caused, not by
disease of the glands themselves, but
by an increase or decrease in the blood
level of hormones that influence the
action of the adrenal glands. For exam-
ple, hydrocortisone production by the
adrenal cortex is controlled by  ACTH,
which is secreted by the pituitary gland.
Pituitary disorders can disrupt produc-
tion of hydrocortisone.
ADRENAL GLAND DISORDERS ADJUVANT
A
Blood vessel
Kidney
Kidney
Adrenal
cortex
Adrenal
gland
LOCATION
ADRENAL GLANDS
Adrenal
medulla
Fat
STRUCTURE OF ADRENAL GLAND14
adrenal hyperplasia, congenital An
uncommon genetic disorder in which an
enzyme defect blocks the production 
of corticosteroid hormones from the
adrenal glands. Excessive amounts of
androgens (male sex hormones) are pro-
duced, which can result in abnormal
genital development in an affected fetus.
Other effects include dehydration,
weight loss, low blood pressure, and
hypoglycaemia.  Hyperplasia (enlarge-
ment) of theadrenal glands occurs and
there is excessive skin pigmentation in
skin creases and around the nipples.
In severe cases, the disorder is appar-
ent soon after birth. In milder cases,
symptoms appear later, sometimes pro-
ducing premature puberty in boys and
delayed menstruation,  hirsutism, and
potential infertility in girls.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is con-
firmed by measuring corticosteroid
hormones in blood and urine. Treat-
ment is by hormone replacement. If this
is started early, normal sexual develop-
ment and fertility usually follow. 
adrenaline A hormone, also called
epinephrine, released by the adrenal
glands in response to signals from the
sympathetic  autonomic nervous system.
These signals are triggered by stress,
exercise, or by an emotion such as fear.
Adrenaline increases the speed and
force of the heartbeat. It widens the air-
ways to improve breathing and narrows
blood vessels in the skin and intestine
so that an increased flow of blood
reaches the muscles.
Synthetic adrenaline is sometimes
given by injection as an emergency
treatment for  cardiac arrest or  anaphy-
lactic shock. Adrenaline eye drops may
be used to treat  glaucoma, but regular
use can cause a burning pain in the eye. 
adrenaltumours Cancerous or non-
cancerous tumours in the  adrenal
glands, usually causing excess secretion
of hormones. Adrenal tumours are rare.
Tumours of the adrenal cortex may
secrete  aldosterone, causing primary
aldosteronism, or hydrocortisone, caus-
ing  Cushing＊s syndrome. Tumours of 
the medulla may cause excess secretion
of  adrenaline and  noradrenaline. Two
types of tumour affect the medulla:
phaeochromocytoma and neuroblastoma,
which affects children. These tumours
cause intermittent  hypertension and
sweating attacks. Surgical removal of a
tumour usually cures these conditions.
adrenocorticotrophic hormone See
ACTH. 
adrenogenital syndrome See  adrenal
hyperplasia, congenital.
aerobic Requiring oxygen to live, func-
tion, and grow. Humans and many
other forms of life are dependent on
oxygen for ※burning§ foods to produce 
energy (see  metabolism). In contrast,
many bacteria thrive without oxygen
and are described as anaerobic. 
aerobics Exercises, such as swimming
and cycling, that allow muscles to work
at a steady rate with a constant, ade-
quate supply of oxygen-carrying blood,
and that can therefore be sustained for
long periods. Oxygen is used to release
energy from the body＊s  stores. To fuel
aerobic exercise, the muscles use fatty
acid, burning it completely to produce
energy, carbon dioxide, and water.
When performed regularly, aerobic
exercises improve stamina and endur-
ance. They encourage the growth of
capillaries, improving blood supply to
the cells. Aerobic exercises also improve
body cells＊ capacity to use oxygen and
increase the amount of oxygen the body
can use in a given time. The condition
of the heart also improves. (See also
exercise; fitness.) 
aerodontalgia Sudden pain in a tooth
brought on by a change in surrounding
air pressure. Flying at a high altitude in
a lowered atmospheric pressure can
cause a pocket of air in the dental pulp
to expand and irritate the nerve in the
root. Aerodontalgia is more likely if
there are improperly  fitting fillings or
poorly filled root canals. 
aerophagy Excessive swallowing of air,
which may occur during rapid eating or
drinking or be caused by anxiety. 
aetiology The cause of a disease or the
study of the various factors involved in
causing a disease.
affect A term used to describe a per-
son＊s mood. The 2 extremes of affect are
elation and depression. A person who
experiences extreme moods or changes
ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA, CONGENITALAFFECT
A15
in moods may have an  affective
disorder. Shallow or reduced affect may
be a sign of  schizophrenia or of an
organic brain syndrome. 
affective disorders Mental illnesses
characterized predominantly by marked
changes in affect. Mood may vary over a
period of time between mania (extreme
elation) and severe  depression. (See
also manic每depressive illness.)
affinity A term used to describe the
attraction between chemicals that causes
them to bind together, as, for example,
between an antigen and an antibody
(see immune response). In microbiology,
affinity describes physical similarity
between organisms. In psychology, it
refers to attraction between 2 people. 
aflatoxin A poisonous substance pro-
duced by  ASPERGILLUS FLAVUS  moulds,
which contaminate stored foods, espe-
cially grains, peanuts, and cassava.
Aflatoxin is believed to be one of the
factors responsible for the high inci-
dence of liver cancer in tropical Africa.
afterbirth The common name for the
tissues that are expelled from the uterus
after delivery of a baby. The afterbirth
includes the  placenta and the mem-
branes that surrounded the fetus.
afterpains Contractions of the uterus
that continue after childbirth. Afterpains
are normal and are experienced by
many women, especially  during breast-
feeding. They usually disappear a few
days following the birth but may require
treatment with analgesic drugs. 
agammaglobulinaemia A type of  im-
munodeficiency disorder in which there
is almost complete absence of B-lympho-
cytes and immunoglobulins in the blood.
agar An extract of certain seaweeds
with similar properties to gelatine. It
can be taken for constipation to soften
and give bulk to faeces, and to relieve
indigestion and heartburn. Agar is also
used as a gelling agent in media for
bacterial cultures.
age The length of time a person has
existed. Of medical significance in diag-
nosis and in determining treatment, a
person＊s age is usually measured
chronologically, but it can also be mea-
sured in terms of physical, mental, or
developmental maturity. 
The age of a fetus is measured in terms
of gestational age, which can be
assessed  accurately by ultrasound scan-
ning. In children,  the most useful
measure of physical development is
bone age (degree of bone maturity as
seen on an  X-ray) because all healthy
individuals reach the same adult level
of skeletal maturity, and each bone
passes through the same sequence of
growth. Dental age, another measure 
of physical maturity, can be assessed by
the number of teeth that have erupted
(see eruption of teeth) or by the amount
of dental calcification (as seen on an 
X-ray) compared with standard values.
In adults, physical age is difficult to
assess other than by physical appear-
ance. It can be estimated after death by
the state of certain organs.
Mental age can be assessed by com-
paring scores on  intelligence tests with
standards for chronological age. A young
child＊s age can be expressed in terms of
the level of developmental skills, man-
ual dexterity, language, and social skills.
agenesis The complete absence at birth
of an organ or bodily component, caused
by failure of development in the embryo.
agent Any substance or force capable of
bringing about a biological, chemical,or
physical change. (See also reagent.)
Agent Orange A herbicide of which
the major constituent is the phenoxy
acid herbicide 2,4,5 T. This substance
may be contaminated in manufacture
with the highly toxic TCDD, commonly
known as dioxin (see defoliant poisoning).
age spots Blemishes that appear on the
skin with increasing age. Most common
are seborrhoeic  keratoses, which are
brown or yellow, slightly raised spots
that can occur at any site. Also common
in elderly people are freckles, solar kera-
toses (small blemishes caused by
overexposure to the sun), and De Mor-
gan＊s spots, which are red, pinpoint
blemishes on the trunk. Treatment is
usually unnecessary for any of these,
apart from  solar keratoses, which may
eventually progress to skin cancer.
ageusia The lack or an impairment of
the sense of taste (see taste, loss of).
aggregation,platelet Theclumping
together of platelets (small, sticky blood
AGGREGATION, PLATELET AFFECTIVE DISORDERS
A16
particles). Aggregation is the  1st stage
of  blood clotting and helps to plug
injured vessels. Inappropriate aggre-
gation can  have adverse effects; for
example, if aggregation occurs in an
artery, it may result in a thrombosis.
aggression A general term for a wide
variety of acts of hostility. A number of
factors, including human evolutionary
survival strategies, are thought to be
involved in aggression.  Androgen hor-
mones, the male sex hormones, seem to
promote  aggression, whereas  oestrogen
hormones, the female sex hormones,
actively suppress it. Age is another
factor; aggression is more common
among teenagers and young adults.
Sometimes, a brain tumour or head
injury leads to aggressive behaviour.
Psychiatric conditions associated with
aggressive outbursts are  schizophrenia,
antisocial personality disorder,  mania,
and abuse of amfetamines or alcohol.
Temporal lobe epilepsy,  hypoglycaemia,
and confusion due to physical illnesses
are other, less common, medical causes.
aging The physical and mental changes
that occur with the passing of time.
Aging is associated with degenerative
changes in various organs and tissues,
such as loss of elasticity in the skin and
a progressive decline in organ function.
Mechanical wear and tear causes cumu-
lative damage to the joints, and the
muscles lose bulk and strength. Wound
healing and resistance to infection also
decline. Gradual loss of nerve cells can
lead to reduced sensory acuity  and dif-
ficulties with learning and  memory.
However,  dementia occurs in only a
minority of elderly people. 
Heredity is an important determinant
of life expectancy, but physical degener-
ation may be accelerated by factors
such as smoking, excessive alcohol in-
take, poor diet, and insufficient exercise.
agitation Restless inability to keep still,
usually as a result of anxiety or tension.
Agitated people engage in aimless,
repetitive behaviour, such as pacing up
and down or wringing their hands, and
they often start tasks without complet-
ing them. Persistent agitation is seen 
in anxiety disorders,especially if there is
an underlying physical cause such as
alcohol withdrawal. Depression may be
accompanied by agitation. 
agnosia An inability to recognize objects
despite adequate sensory information
about them reaching the brain via the
eyes or ears or through touch. Agnosia
is caused by damage to areas of the
brain that are involved in interpretative
and recall functions. The most common
causes of this kind of damage are stroke
or head injury.
Agnosia is usually associated with just
one of the senses of vision, hearing, or
touch and is described as visual, audit-
ory, or tactile respectively. Some people,
after a stroke that damages the right
cerebral hemisphere, seem unaware of
any disability in their affected left limbs.
This is called anosognosia or sensory
inattention. There is no specific treat-
ment for agnosia, but some interpretative
ability may return eventually.
agonist Having a stimulating effect. An
agonist drug, sometimes known as an
activator, is one that binds to a sensory
nerve cell (receptor) and triggers or in-
creases a particular activity in that cell.
agoraphobia Fear of going into open
spaces or public places. Agoraphobia
(see  phobia) may occur with  claustro-
phobia. If sufferers do venture out, they
may have a panic attack, which may lead
to further restriction of activities. Peo-
ple with agoraphobia may eventually
become housebound. Treatment with
behaviour therapy is usually successful.
Antidepressant drugs may be helpful.
agraphia Loss of, or impaired, ability to
write, despite normal functioning of the
hand and arm muscles, caused by brain
damage. Agraphia can resultfrom dam-
age to any of the various parts of the
cerebrum concerned with writing and
can therefore be of different types and
degrees of severity. Such damage is most
commonly due to head injury, stroke, or
a brain tumour. Agraphia is often accom-
paniedby  alexia (loss of the ability to
read) or may be part of an expressive
aphasia (general disturbance in the
expression of language). There is no
specific treatment for agraphia, but some
lost writing skills may return in time.
ague An outdated term for malaria or
other diseases causing fever in which
AGGRESSION AGUE
A17
the sufferer alternately feels excessively
hot and shiveringly cold.
AIDS Acquired immune deficiency syn-
drome, a deficiency of the  immune
system due to infection with HIV (human
immunodeficiency virus). In most coun-
tries, illness and death from AIDS is a
growing health problem, and there is,
as yet, no cure or vaccine. 
AIDS does not develop in all people
infected with HIV. The interval between
infection and the development of AIDS
is highly variable. Without treatment,
around half of those people infected
will develop AIDS within 8每9 years.
HIV is transmitted in body fluids, in-
cluding semen, blood, vaginal secretions,
and breast milk. The major methods of
transmission are sexual contact (vagi-
nal, anal, or oral), blood to blood (via
transfusions or needle-sharing in drug
users), and mother to fetus. HIV has
also been transmitted through blood
products given to treat haemophilia, arti-
ficialinsemination by donated semen,
and kidney transplants; but improved
screening has greatly reduced these
risks. HIV is not spread by everyday con-
tact, such as hugging or sharing crockery.
The virus enters the bloodstream and
infects cells that have a particular recep-
tor,known as the CD4 receptor, on their
surface. These cells include a type of
white blood cell (a CD4 lymphocyte)
responsible for fighting infection and
cells in other tissues such as the brain.
The virus reproduces within the infected
cells, which then die,  releasing more
virus particles into the blood. If the
infection is left untreated, the number
of CD4 lymphocytes falls, resulting in
greater susceptibility to  certain  infec-
tions and some types of cancer.
Some people experience a short-lived
illness similar to infectious mononucle-
osis when they are first infected with
HIV. Many individuals have no obvious
symptoms; some have only vague com-
plaints, such as weight loss, fevers,
sweats, or unexplained diarrhoea, des-
cribed as AIDS-related complex.
Minor features of HIV infection in-
clude skin disorders such as seborrhoeic
dermatitis. More severe features include
persistent herpes simplex infections, oral
candidiasis (thrush), shingles,  tuberculo-
sis, and  shigellosis. HIV may also affect
the brain, causing a variety of neurolog-
ical disorders, including dementia. 
Certain conditions, known as AIDS-
defining illnesses, are characteristic of
full-blown AIDS. These include cancers
(Kaposi＊s sarcoma and lymphoma of 
the brain), and various infections (pneu-
mocystis pneumonia,  cytomegalovirus
infection,  toxoplasmosis, diarrhoea due
to CRYPTOSPORIDIUM or ISOSPORA, candid-
iasis, disseminated strongyloidiasis, and
cryptococcosis), many of which are
described as opportunistic infections. 
Confirmation of HIV infection involves
testing a blood sample for the presence
of antibodies to HIV.Diagnosis of full-
blown AIDS is based on a positive HIV
test along with the presence of an AIDS-
defining illness.
The risk of infection with HIV can be
reduced by practising  safer sex. Intra-
venous drug users should not share
needles.There is a small risk to health
workers handling infected blood prod-
ucts or needles, but this risk can be
minimized by safe practices.
Treatment of HIV infection with a com-
bination of antiviral drugs can slow the
disease＊s progress, and may prevent 
the development of full-blown AIDS. The
2 main types of antiviral drug used are
proteaseinhibitors, such as indinavir,
and reverse transcriptase inhibitors
such as  zidovudine. Treatment is also
available for AIDS-defining illnesses. 
AIDS-related complex A combination
of weight loss, fever, and enlarged lymph
nodes in a person who has been infec-
ted with HIV (the AIDS virus), but does
not have AIDS itself. Many people with
AIDS-related complex will eventually
develop the features of AIDS.
air The colourless, odourless mixture of
gases that forms the Earth＊s atmosphere.
Air consists of 78 per cent nitrogen, 21
per cent  oxygen, small quantities of
carbon dioxide and other gases, and
some water vapour.
air conditioning A system that controls
the purity, humidity, and temperature 
of the air in a building.  Contaminated
air-conditioning systems may cause le-
gionnaires＊ disease and humidifier fever
AIR CONDITIONING AIDS
A18
(a lung disease causing coughing and
breathing difficulty). 
air embolism Blockage of a small artery
by an air bubble carried in the blood.
Air embolism is rare. In most cases, it is
caused by air entering the circulation
through a vein, either due to injury or
surgery. Air embolism can also occur
during diving or air travel accidents, in
which lung tissue ruptures, releasing
bubbles into the bloodstream. 
air pollution See pollution.
air swallowing See aerophagy.
airway A collective term for the pas-
sages through which air enters and
leaves the lungs (see  respiratory sys-
tem). The term is also applied to a tube
inserted into the mouth of an uncon-
scious person to prevent the tongue
from obstructing breathing. 
airway obstruction Narrowing or block-
ageof the respiratory passages. The
obstruction may be due to a foreign
body, such as a piece of food, that
becomes lodged in part of the upper
airway and may result in  choking. Cer-
tain disorders, such as  diphtheria and
lung cancer, can  cause obstruction.
Additionally, spasm of the muscular
walls of the airway, as occurs in  bron-
chospasm (a feature of  asthma), results
in breathing difficulty.
akathisia An inability to sit still, occa-
sionally occurringas a  side effect of an
antipsychotic drug or, less commonly, as
a complication of Parkinson＊s disease.
akinesia Complete or almost complete
loss of movement. It may be a result of
damage to part of the brain due, for ex-
ample, to a stroke or Parkinson＊s disease.
albinism A rare genetic disorder charac-
terized by a lack of the pigment melanin,
which gives colour to the skin, hair, and
eyes.In  oculocutaneous albinism (the
most common type), the hair, skin, and
eyes are all affected. Less often, only
the eyes are affected. In both forms,
skin cannot tan and ages prematurely,
and  skin cancers may develop on areas
exposed to the sun. Visual problems of
people with albinism include photopho-
bia,  nystagmus,  squint, and  myopia.
Glasses are usually needed from an
early age; and tinted glasses help to
reduce photophobia. 
albumin The most abundant protein in
the  blood plasma. Albumin is made in
the liver from amino acids. It helps to
retain substances (such as calcium,
some hormones, and certain drugs) in
the circulation by binding to them to
prevent them from being filtered out by
the kidneys and excreted. Albumin also
regulates the movement of water bet-
ween tissues and the bloodstream by
osmosis. (See also albuminuria.)
albuminuria The presence of the pro-
tein  albumin in the urine; a type of
proteinuria. Normally, the glomeruli (the
filtering units of the kidneys) do not
allow albumin to pass into the urine.
Albuminuria therefore usually indicates
that there is damage to the kidneys＊
filtering mechanisms. Such damage
may be due to a kidney disorder, such
as  glomerulonephritis or  nephrotic syn-
drome, or maybe a sign that the kidneys
have been affected by  hypertension.
Albuminuria can be detected by a sim-
ple urine test.
alcohol A colourless liquid produced
from the fermentation of carbohydrates
by yeast. Also known as ethanol, alco-
hol is the active constituent of drinks
such as beer and wine. In medicine, it is
used as an antiseptic and solvent. Meth-
anol is a related, highly toxic substance. 
Alcohol is a drug and produces a wide
range of mental and physical effects.
The effect of alcohol on the  central
nervous system is as a depressant,
decreasing its activity and thereby
reducing anxiety, tension, and inhibi-
tions. In moderate amounts, alcohol
produces a feeling of relaxation, confi-
dence, and sociability. However, alcohol
slows reactions, and the more that is
drunk, the greater is the impairment of
concentration and judgement. Exces-
sive consumption of alcohol results in 
poisoning or acute  alcohol intoxication,
with effects ranging from euphoria to
unconsciousness.
Short-term physical effects of alcohol
include peripheral  vasodilation (widen-
ing of the small blood vessels), which
causes the face to flush, and increased
flow of gastric juices, which stimulates
the appetite.  Alcohol increases sexual
confidence, but high levels can cause
AIR EMBOLISM ALCOHOL
A19
impotence. Alcohol also acts as a
diuretic, increasing urine output. 
In the long term, regular excessive
alcohol consumption can cause gastritis
(inflammation and ulceration of the
stomach lining), and  lead to  alcohol-
related disorders. Heavy drinking in 
the long term may also lead to alcohol
dependence. However, people who drink
regular, small amounts of alcohol (an
average of 1每2 units a day) seem to
have lower rates of  coronary heart dis-
ease and stroke than total abstainers. 
alcohol dependence An illness char-
acterized by habitual, compulsive, long-
term, heavy consumption of alcohol and
the development of withdrawal symp-
toms when drinking is suddenly stopped.
Three causative factors interact in the
development of the illness: personality,
environment, and the addictive nature
of alcohol. Inadequate, insecure, or
immature personalities are more at risk.
Environmental factors are important,
especially the ready availability, afford-
ability, and social acceptance of alcohol.
Genetic factors may play a part in caus-
ing dependence in some cases, but it is
now widely believed that anyone, irre-
spective of personality, environment, or
genetic background, can become an
alcoholic. Stress is often a major factor
in precipitating heavy drinking. 
Alcohol dependence usually develops
in 4 main stages that occur over a num-
ber of years. In the 1st phase, tolerance
to alcohol develops in the heavy social
drinker. In the 2nd phase, the drinker
experiences memory lapses relating to
events during the drinking episodes. In
the 3rd phase, there is loss of control
over alcohol consumption. The final
phase is characterized by prolonged
binges of intoxication and mental or
physical complications.
Behavioural symptoms are varied and
can include furtive, aggressive, or grand-
iose behaviour; personality changes
(such as irritability, jealousy, or uncon-
trolled anger); neglect of food intake
and personal appearance; and lengthy
periods of intoxication.
Physical symptoms may include nau-
sea, vomiting, or shaking in the morning;
abdominal pain; cramps; numbness or
tingling; weakness in the legs and
hands; irregular pulse; enlarged blood
vessels in the face; unsteadiness; confu-
sion; memory lapses; and incontinence.
After sudden withdrawal from alcohol,
delirium tremens may occur.
Alcohol-dependent persons are more
susceptible than others to a variety of
physical and mental disorders (see
alcohol-related disorders).
Many alcoholics require detoxification
followed by long-term treatment. Dif-
ferent methods of treatment may be
combined. Psychological treatments in-
volve psychotherapy and are commonly
carried out as  group therapy. Social
treatments may offer practical help and
tend to include family members in the
process. Physical treatment generally
includes the use of disulfiram, a drug
that sensitizes the drinker to alcohol so
that he or she experiences unpleasant
side effects when drinking.  Alcoholics
Anonymous and other self-help organiz-
ations can provide support and advice. 
Alcoholics Anonymous A worldwide,
independent, self-help organization that
is operated locally by people working
on a voluntary basis to overcome alco-
hol dependence. Regular group meetings
are held in which members are encour-
aged to help one another stay sober by
sharing their experiences openly and
offering support and advice.
alcohol intoxication The condition that
results from consuming an excessive
amount of alcohol, often over a relativ-
ely short period. The effects of a large
alcohol intake depend on many factors,
including physical and mental state,
body size, social situation, and acquired
tolerance. The important factor, how-
ever, is the blood alcohol level. Mild
intoxication promotes relaxation and
increases social confidence. Alcohol
causes acute poisoning if taken in suf-
ficiently large amounts, however. It
depresses the activity of the central ner-
vous system, leading to loss of normal
mental and physical control. In extreme
cases, intoxication may lead  to loss of
consciousness and even death. 
In most cases, recovery from alcohol
intoxication takes place naturally as 
the alcohol is gradually broken down in
ALCOHOL INTOXICATION ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE
A20
the liver. Medical attention is required 
if the intoxication has resulted in 
coma. For the chronic mental, physical,
and social effects of long-term heavy
drinking, see  alcohol dependence and
alcohol-related disorders.
alcoholism See alcohol dependence.
alcohol-related disorders A wide var-
iety of physical and mental disorders
associated with heavy, prolonged con-
sumption of alcohol. 
High alcohol consumption increases
the risk of cancers of the mouth, tongue,
pharynx (throat), larynx (voice box), and
oesophagus, especially if combined with
smoking. Incidence of  liver cancer, as
well as the liver diseases alcoholic hep-
atitis and  cirrhosis, is higher among
alcoholics. High alcohol consumption
increases the risk of  cardiomyopathy,
hypertension, and  stroke. Alcohol irri-
tates the digestive tract and may cause
gastritis. Heavy drinking in pregnancy
increases the risk of miscarriage and
fetal alcohol syndrome. Alcoholics are
more likely to suffer from  anxiety and
depression and to develop dementia.
Many alcoholics have a poor diet and
are prone to diseases caused by nutri-
tional deficiency, particularly of thiamine
(see  vitamin B complex). Severe thia-
mine deficiency, called beriberi, disturbs
nerve function, causing cramps,numb-
ness, and weakness in the legs and
hands. Its effects on the brain can cause
confusion, disturbances of speechand
gait, and eventual coma (see Wernicke每
Korsakoff syndrome). Severe thiamine
deficiency can also cause heart failure.
A prolonged high level of alcohol in
the blood and tissues can disturb body
chemistry, resulting in  hypoglycaemia
(reduced glucose in the blood) and
hyperlipidaemia  (increased fat in the
blood). These may damage the heart,
liver, blood vessels, and brain; irrevers-
ible damage may cause premature death. 
aldosterone A hormone secreted by
the adrenal cortex (the outer part of the
adrenal glands). Aldosterone acts on the
kidneys to regulate the concentrations
of sodium and potassium in the blood
and tissues and control blood pressure.
Production of aldosterone is stimulated
mainly by the action of angiotensin II, a
chemical produced by a series of reac-
tions involving the enzymes  renin and
angiotensin-converting enzyme. Aldos-
terone production is also stimulated by
the action of ACTH, which is produced
by the pituitary gland. 
aldosteronism A disorder that results
from the excessive production of the
hormone aldosterone from one or both
adrenal glands. Aldosteronism caused
by an  adrenal tumour is known as
Conn＊s syndrome. Aldosteronism may
also be caused by disorders, such as
heart failure or liver damage, that reduce
the flow of blood through the kidneys.
Reduced blood flow through the kid-
neys leads to overproduction of  renin
and angiotensin, which, in turn, leads to
excessive aldosterone production. 
Symptoms are directly related to the
actions of aldosterone. Too much sodium
is retained in the body, leading to a rise
in blood pressure, and excess potassium
is lost in the urine. Low potassium cau-
ses tiredness and muscle weakness and
impairs kidney function, leading to thirst
and overproduction of urine. 
Treatment in all cases includes res-
triction of dietary salt and use of the
diuretic drug spironolactone. If the cause
of aldosteronism is an adrenal tumour,
this may be surgically removed.
alendronate sodium  See  alendronic
acid.
alendronic acid A bisphosphonatedrug
used in the treatment of  osteoporosis
and  Paget＊s disease of bone. The most
common side effect is inflammation of
the oesophagus, which causes heart-
burn or difficulty in swallowing. Other
side effects can include headache and
abdominal pain.
Alexander technique A therapy that
aims to improve health by teaching peo-
pleto stand and move more efficiently.
The technique is based on the belief
that bad patterns of body movement
interfere with the proper functioning of
the body and contribute to the develop-
ment of disease.
alexia Word blindness; inability to rec-
ognize and name written words. Alexia
is causedby damage to part of the cere-
brum (the main mass of the brain) by a
stroke, forexample. It severely disrupts
ALCOHOLISM ALEXIA
A21
the reading ability of a person who was
previously literate. (See also dyslexia.)
alienation Feeling like a stranger, even
when among familiar people or places,
and being unable to identify with a cul-
ture, family, or peer group. Alienation is
common in adolescents and also occurs
in people who are isolated by cultural
or language differences. In some people,
it may be an early symptom of  schizo-
phrenia or a personality disorder. 
alignment, dental The movement of
teeth by using either fixed or removable
orthodontic appliances (braces) to cor-
rect malocclusion (incorrect bite). 
alimemazine An antihistamine drug, also
known as trimeprazine, that is used
mainly to relieve itching in allergic con-
ditions such as  urticaria and atopic
eczema. Alimemazine often causes
drowsiness.
alimentary tract The tube-like struc-
ture that extends from the mouth to the
anus (see digestive system).
alkali Also known as a base, an alkali is
chemically defined as a donor of hydroxyl
ions (each of which comprises an atom
of hydrogen linked to an atom of oxygen
and has an overall negative electrical
charge). Antacid drugs, such as sodium
bicarbonate, are alkalis. Some alkalis,
such as sodium hydroxide, are corro-
sive. (See also acid; acid每base balance.)
alkaloids A group of nitrogen-containing
substances obtained from plants. Mor-
phine, codeine, nicotine, and strychnine
(see strychninepoisoning) are examples.
alkalosis A disturbance of the body＊s
acid每base balance in which there is an
accumulation of alkali or a loss of acid.
There are 2 types: metabolic and res-
piratory. In metabolic alkalosis, the
increase in alkalinity may be caused by
taking too much of an  antacid drug or
by losing a large amount of stomach
acid as a result of severe vomiting. In
respiratory alkalosis, there is a reduc-
tion in the blood level of carbonic acid
(derived from carbon dioxide). This
reduction is a consequence of  hyper-
ventilation, which may occur during a
panic attack or at high altitudes due to
lack of oxygen. (See also acidosis.)
alkylating agents A class of anticancer
drugs.
allele One of 2 or more different forms of
a gene that occupies a specific position
on a chromosome (see gene; inheritance).
allergen A normally harmless substance
that causes an allergic reaction (see
allergy) in people who have become
sensitized to it. Allergens can include
foods (for example, nuts, eggs, and shell-
fish); inhaled substances such as pollen,
house dust, and fur; and some drugs.
allergy Various conditions caused by
inappropriate or exaggerated reactions
of the immune system (known as hyper-
sensitivity reactions) to a variety of
substances. Many common illnesses,
such as asthma and allergic rhinitis (hay
fever), are caused by allergic reactions
to substances that in the majority of
people cause no symptoms.
Allergic reactions occur only on 2nd or
subsequent exposure to the  allergen,
once 1st contact has sensitized the body.
The function of the immune system is
to recognize antigens (foreign proteins)
on the surfaces of microorganisms and
to form antibodies (also called immuno-
globulins) and sensitized  lymphocytes
(white blood cells). When the immune
system next encounters the same anti-
gens, the antibodies and sensitized
lymphocytes interact with them, leading
to destruction of the microorganisms. 
A similar immune response occurs in
allergies, except that the immune system
forms antibodies or sensitized lymph-
ocytes against harmless substances
because these  allergens are misidenti-
fied as potentially harmful antigens.
The inappropriate or exaggerated re-
actions seen in allergies are termed
ALLERGY ALIENATION
A
ALLERGY
Histamine
released
Allergen
binds to
antibody
Mast cell
Nucleus
Antibody
attaches to
mast cell 
Allergen
TYPE I HYPERSENSITIVITY
Histamine22
hypersensitivity reactions and can have
any of four different mechanisms (termed
Types I to IV hypersensitivity reactions).
Most well known allergies are caused by
Type I (also known as anaphylactic or
immediate) hypersensitivity in which
allergens cause immediate symptoms
by provoking the immune system to
produce specific antibodies, belonging
to a type called immunoglobulin E
(IgE), which coat cells (called mast cells
or basophils). When the allergen is
encountered for the second time, it
binds to the IgE antibodies and causes
the granules in mast cells to release
various chemicals, which are responsi-
ble for the symptoms of the allergy.
Among the chemicals released is hist-
amine, which causes widened blood
vessels, leakage of fluid into tissues, and
muscle spasm. Symptoms can include
itching, swelling, sneezing, and wheez-
ing. Particular conditions associated
with Type I  reactions  include asthma,
hay fever,  urticaria (nettle rash), angio-
edema,  anaphylactic shock  (a severe,
generalized allergic reaction), possibly
atopic eczema, and many food allergies.
Types II to IV hypersensitivity reac-
tions are less often implicated in
allergies. However, contact dermatitis,
in which the skin reacts to substances
such as nickel, is due to a Type IV hyper-
sensitivity reaction.
It is not known why certain individuals
and not others get allergies, but about 
1 in 8 people seem to have an inherited
predisposition to them (see atopy). 
Whenever possible, the most effective
treatment for allergy of any kind is
avoidance of the relevant allergen. 
Drug treatment for allergic reactions
includes the use of antihistamine drugs,
which relieve the symptoms.Some anti-
histamine drugs have a sedative effect,
which is useful in treating itching at
night due to eczema. Many antihista-
mines do not cause drowsiness, making
them more suitable for daytime use. 
Other drugs, such as sodium cromogli-
cate and  corticosteroid drugs, can be
used regularly to prevent symptoms
from developing.
Hyposensitization can be valuable for a
minority of people who suffer allergic
reactions to specific allergens such as
bee stings. Treatment involves gradu-
ally increasing doses of the allergen,
but it must be carried out under close
supervision because a severe allergic
reaction can result.
allopathy The practice of conventional
medicine. (See also homeopathy.)
allopurinol A drug treatment for  gout.
Taken long term, it reduces the frequ-
ency of attacks by decreasing production
of  uric acid.Possible adverse reactions
include itching, rashes, and nausea. 
alopecia Loss or absence of hair, which
may occur at any  hair-bearing site on
the body but which is usually notice-
able only on the scalp.
Male-pattern baldness, the most com-
mon form of alopecia, is hereditary and
most often affects men. Normal hair is
lost initially from the temples and
crown and is replaced by fine, downy
hair; the affected area gradually widens.
Other hereditary forms are rare. They
may be due to an absence of hair roots
or abnormalities of the hair shaft.
In generalized alopecia, the hair falls
out in large amounts. Causes include
various forms of stress, such as surgery,
prolonged illness, or childbirth. Many
anticancer drugs cause temporary alo-
pecia. The hair regrows when the
underlying cause is corrected. 
Localized alopecia may be due to per-
manent skin damage (for example, by
burns or  radiotherapy) or trauma to 
the hair roots by styling or,  rarely,
trichotillomania (a disorder in which suf-
ferers pull out their hair). The most
common type of localized hair loss is
alopecia areata, which is an  autoim-
mune disorder. There is no specific
treatment, but the hair usually regrows
within a few months. Alopecia univer-
salis is a rare, permanent form of
alopecia areata that causes loss of all the
hair on the scalp and body, including
the eyelashes and eyebrows. Skin dis-
eases such as scalp ringworm (see
tinea),  lichenplanus,  lupus erythemato-
sus, and  skin tumours may also cause
localized hair loss.
Treatments for male-pattern baldness
include hair transplants or drug treat-
ments with minoxidil or finasteride. 
ALLOPATHY ALOPECIA
A23
alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency A rare
genetic disorder in which a person is
missing the enzyme alpha1-antitrypsin,
which protects the body from damage
by other enzymes. The disease mainly
affects tissues in the lungs, resulting in
emphysema, and the liver, causing  cir-
rhosis. The effects of alpha1-antitrypsin
deficiency may not become apparent
until after the age of 30. There is no
cure, but symptoms can be relieved by
drug treatment. In severe cases, a  liver
transplant may be a possibility.
alpha-blocker drugs A group of drugs
used to treat  hypertension (high blood
pressure) and urinary symptoms due to
enlargement of the  prostategland.
Alpha-blockers are also used to treat
urinary retention caused by an enlarged
prostate gland (see prostate, enlarged).
Side effects of the drugs may include
dizziness and fatigue due to a sudden
drop in blood pressure, nausea, dry
mouth, and drowsiness.
alpha-fetoprotein A protein that is
produced in the liver and gastrointes-
tinal tract of the fetus and by some
abnormal tissues in adults.
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) can  bemeas-
ured in the maternal blood from the
latter part of the 1st trimester of preg-
nancy, and its concentration rises
between the 15th and 20th weeks.
Raised levels of AFP are associated with
fetal neural tube defects, such as  spina
bifida or  anencephaly, and certain kid-
ney abnormalities. High levels of AFP
also occur in multiple pregnancies (see
pregnancy, multiple) and threatened or
actual  miscarriage. AFP levels may be
unusually low if the fetus has  Down＊s
syndrome. For this reason, measure-
ment of blood AFP is included in blood
tests, which are used to screen preg-
nant women for an increased risk of
Down＊s syndrome.
AFP levels are commonly raised in
adults with hepatoma (see  liver cancer),
cancerous  teratoma of the testes or
ovaries, or cancer of the pancreas,
stomach, or lung. For this reason, AFP
is known as a tumour marker. AFP levels
can be used to monitor the results of
treatment of certain cancers; increasing
levels after surgery or chemotherapy
may indicate tumour recurrence. How-
ever, AFP levels are also raised in some
noncancerous conditions, including viral
and alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis.
alprazolam A benzodiazepine drug used
in the treatment of anxiety, panic attacks,
and phobias.
alprostadil A  prostaglandin drug used,
prior to surgery, to minimize the effects
of congenital heart defects in newborn
babies. Alprostadil is also used as a
treatment for impotence. It is adminis-
tered by self-injection into the penis or
as a gel introduced into the urethra to
produce an erection.
alternative medicine Any medical sys-
tem based on a theory of disease or
method of treatment other than the
orthodox science of Western medicine.
(See also complementary medicine.)
altitude sickness See mountain sickness.
aluminium A light, metallic element
found in bauxite and various other min-
erals. Aluminium compounds are used
in  antacid medications and in  antiper-
spirants. Most of the aluminium taken
into the body is excreted. Excessive
amounts are toxic and are stored in the
lungs, brain, liver, and thyroid gland,
where they may result in organ damage.
Certain industrial processes give off
fumes containing aluminium into the
air. These fumes can cause  fibrosis of
lung tissue. Drugs that contain alumin-
ium may interfere with the absorption
of other drugs and, therefore, should
not be taken at the same time.
alveolectomy See alveoloplasty.
alveolitis Inflammation and thickening
of the walls of the alveoli (tiny air sacs)
in the lungs. Alveolitis reduces the elas-
ticity, and therefore the efficiency, of the
lungs. It is most commonly due to an
allergic reaction to inhaled dust of ani-
mal or plant origin, as in  farmer＊s lung,
bagassosis, and pigeon fancier＊s lung
(due to particles from bird droppings).
Fibrosing alveolitis is an  autoimmune
disorder. In some cases, it occurs with
other autoimmune disorders such as
rheumatoid arthritis  or systemic  lupus
erythematosus. Radiation alveolitis is
caused by irradiation of the lungs and
may occur as a rare complication of
radiotherapy for lung or breast cancer.
ALVEOLITIS ALPHA1-ANTITRYPSIN DEFICIENCY
A24
Alveolitis usually causes a dry cough
and breathing difficulty on exertion. A
chestX-ray, blood tests,  pulmonary
function tests, or a lung  biopsy may be
needed to diagnose alveolitis. 
For most types of alveolitis, a short
course of  corticosteroid drugs relieves
symptoms, but for fibrosing alveolitis
these may need to be taken indefinitely.
If the cause of allergic alveolitis is rec-
ognized and avoided before lung damage
occurs, the effects are not permanent.
In fibrosing alveolitis, damage progresses
despite treatment, causing increasing
breathing difficulty and, sometimes,
respiratory failure.
alveoloplasty Dental surgery to remove
protuberances and smooth out uneven
areas from tooth-bearing bone in the
jaw before the fitting of dentures.
alveolus, dental The bony cavity or
socket supporting each tooth in the jaw. 
alveolus, pulmonary One of a large
number of tiny, balloon-like sacs at the
end of a bronchiole (one of many small
air passages in the lungs) where gases
are exchanged during respiration. 
Alzheimer＊s disease A progressive con-
dition in which nerve cells in the brain
degenerate and the brain shrinks. Alz-
heimer＊s disease is the most common
cause of dementia. Onset is uncommon
before the age of 60.
Early onset Alzheimer's disease, in
which symptoms develop before age 60,
is inherited as a dominant disorder. Late
onset Alzheimer's disease is associated
with a number of genes, including 3 that
are responsible for the production of
the blood protein  apolipoprotein E.
These genes also result in the depo-
sition of a protein called beta amyloid
in the brain. Other  chemical abnorm-
alities may include deficiency of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine.
The features of Alzheimer＊s disease
vary, but there are 3 broad stages. At
first, the person becomes increasingly
forgetful, and problems with memory
may cause  anxiety and  depression. In
the 2nd stage, loss of memory, par-
ticularly for recent events, gradually
becomes more severe, and there may
be disorientation as to time or place.
The person＊s concentration and num-
erical ability decline, and there is
noticeable  dysphasia (inability to find
the right word). Anxiety increases,
mood changes are unpredictable, and
personality changes may occur. Finally,
confusion becomes profound. There
may be symptoms of psychosis, such as
hallucinations and  delusions. Signs of
nervous system disease, such as abnor-
mal  reflexes and faecal or urinary
incontinence, begin to develop.
Alzheimer＊s disease is usually diag-
nosed from the symptoms, but tests
including blood tests and CT scanning
or MRI of the brain may be needed to
exclude treatable causes of dementia.
The most important aspect of treat-
ment for Alzheimer＊s disease is the
provision of suitable nursing and social
care for sufferers and support for their
relatives.  Tranquillizer drugs can often
improve difficult behaviour and help
with sleep. Treatment with drugs such
as donepezil and rivastigmine may slow
the progress of the disease for a time,
but side effects such as nausea and
dizziness may occur. 
amalgam, dental A material, consist-
ing of an alloy of mercury with other
metals, that is used as fillings for teeth
(see filling, dental). 
amantadine An  antiviral drug used in
the prevention and treatment of  influ-
enza A and to help relieve symptoms of
Parkinson＊s disease.
amaurosis fugax Brief loss of vision,
lasting for seconds or minutes, usually
affecting one eye only and caused by
ALVEOLOPLASTY AMAUROSIS FUGAX
A
Pleura
Bronchus
ALVEOLI
LUNGS
ALVEOLUS, PULMONARY
Trachea
Bronchiole
Air space
Blood
vessel
Thin wall
of alveolus25
the temporary blockage of a small
blood vessel in the eye by emboli (parti-
cles of solid matter such as cholesterol
or clotted blood). These are carried in
the bloodstream from diseased arteries
in the neck or, rarely, the heart. Attacks
may be infrequent or they may occur
many times a day. This symptom indi-
cates an increased risk of  stroke and
requires medical investigation. 
ambidexterity The ability to perform
manual skills equally well with either
hand because there is no definite hand-
edness. Ambidexterity is an uncommon
and often familial trait. 
amblyopia A permanent defect of vis-
ual acuity in which there is usually no
structural abnormality in the eye. In
many cases, there is a disturbance of
the visual pathway between the retina
and the brain. The term is also some-
times applied to toxic or nutritional
causes of decreased visual acuity, as in
tobacco每alcohol amblyopia. 
Amblyopia will develop if there is a
marked discrepancy between the images
received by the brain from each eye
while vision is developing during early
childhood. The most common cause is
squint. Failureto form normal retinal
images may also result from congenital
cataract, and  severe, or unequal, focus-
ing errors,  suchas  when one eye is
normal and there is an uncorrected
large degree of astigmatism in the other.
Toxic and nutritional amblyopia may
result from damage to the retina and/or
the optic nerve. 
To prevent amblyopia due to squint,
patching (covering up the good eye to
force the deviating eye to function prop-
erly) is the usual treatment. Surgery to
place the deviating eye in the correct
position may be necessary. Glasses may
be needed to correct severe focusing
errors. Cataracts may be removed surgi-
cally. After the age of 8, amblyopia
cannot usually be remedied. 
ambulance A vehicle for transporting
sick or injured people that is staffed by
trained personnel who can provide emer-
gency treatment during the journey.
ambulatory ECG In ambulatory ECG
(electrocardiography), a wearable device
called a Holter monitor is used to record
the electrical activity of the heart by
means of electrodes attached to the
chest. The  monitor is usually worn for
24 hours or longer and detects intermit-
tent  arrhythmias (abnormal heart rates
and rhythms). The wearer can press a
button on the monitor to mark the
recording whenever symptoms occur.
The recording can later be analysed 
to see if the periods of arrhythmia
coincide with the symptoms.
amelogenesis imperfecta An inherited
condition of the teeth in which the
enamel is either abnormally thin or is
deficient in calcium. Affected teeth may
be pitted and discoloured (see  dis-
coloured teeth) and more susceptible to
dental caries (tooth decay) and wear.
amenorrhoea The absence of mens-
trual periods. Primary amenorrhoea is
defined as failure to start menstruating
by the age of 16. Secondary amenor-
rhoea is the temporary or permanent
cessation of periods in a woman who
has menstruated regularly in the past. 
The main cause of primary amenor-
rhoea is delayed puberty. The delay may
not indicate a disorder, but, rarely, it may
result from a disorder of the endocrine
system, such as a  pituitary tumour,
hypothyroidism, an  adrenal tumour, or
adrenal hyperplasia. Another rare cause
of delayed puberty is Turner＊s syndrome.
In some cases, menstruation fails to
take place because the vagina or the
uterus has been absent from birth, or
because there is no perforation in the
hymen to allow blood to escape.
The most common cause of temporary
secondary amenorrhoea is  pregnancy.
Periods may also cease temporarily after
a woman has stopped taking  oral con-
traceptives. Secondary amenorrhoea may
also result from hormonal changes due
to stress,  depression,  anorexia nervosa,
or certain drugs. Another possible
cause is a disorder of the ovary such as
polycystic ovary (see  ovary, polycystic)
or an ovarian tumour. Amenorrhoea
occurs permanently following the meno-
pause or after a hysterectomy.
amfetamine drugs A group of  stimu-
lant drugs used mainly in the treatment
of narcolepsy (a rare disorder character-
izedby excessive sleepiness).
AMFETAMINE DRUGS AMBIDEXTERITY
A26
In high doses, amfetamines can cause
tremor, sweating, anxiety, and sleeping
problems. Delusions, hallucinations, high
blood pressure, and seizures may also
occur. Prolonged use may produce  tol-
erance and drug dependence.
Amfetamines are often abused for
their stimulant effect.
amiloride A potassium-sparing diuretic
drug. Combined with loop or thiazide
diuretics, amiloride is used to treat
hypertension and fluid retention due to
heart failure or cirrhosis of the liver.
amino acids A group of chemical com-
pounds that form the basic structural
units of all  proteins. Each amino acid
molecule consists of amino and carboxyl
groups of atoms linked to a variable
chain or ring of carbon atoms.
Individual amino acid molecules are
linked together by chemical bonds
called  peptide bonds to form short
chains of molecules called polypeptides.
Hundreds of polypeptides are, in turn,
linked together, also by peptide bonds,
to form a protein molecule. What differ-
entiates one protein from another is the
sequence of the amino acids.
There are 20 different amino acids that
make up all the proteins in the body. Of
these, 12 can be made by the body; they
are known as nonessential amino acids
because they do not need to be ob-
tained from the diet. The other 8, known
as the essential amino acids, cannot be
made by the body and must therefore
be obtained from the diet.
aminoglutethimide An anticancer drug
used to treat certain types of breast
cancer, prostate cancer, and some en-
docrine gland tumours. 
aminoglycosidedrugs A type of  anti-
biotic drug. Aminoglycoside drugs are
given by injection and are generally
reserved for the treatment of serious
infections because their use can dam-
age the inner ear or kidneys. Important
examples are  gentamicin and  strepto-
mycin, which are also used topically for
eye and ear infections.
aminophylline A bronchodilator drug
used to treat chronic bronchitis, asthma,
and, occasionally, heart failure. Nausea,
vomiting, headache, dizziness, and pal-
pitations are possible side effects.
amiodarone An antiarrhythmic drug used
in the treatment of various types of
arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat). Long-
term use of amiodarone may result in
inflammation of the liver, thyroid prob-
lems, and eye and lung damage.
amitriptyline A tricyclic  antidepressant
drug with a sedative effect. It is useful
in the treatment of  depression accom-
panied by anxiety or  insomnia. Possible
adverse effects include blurred vision,
dizziness, and drowsiness. 
amlodipine A  calcium channel blocker
drug used to prevent angina and to treat
hypertension. Possible side effects are
headaches and dizziness.
ammonia A colourless, pungent gas that
dissolves in water to form ammonium
hydroxide, an alkaline solution (see alk-
ali).Ammonia is produced in the body
and helps to maintain the acid每base bal-
ance. In severe liver damage, the ability
of the liver to convert ammonia to urea
is reduced. This leads to a high level of
ammonia in the blood, which is thought
to be a cause of the impaired con-
sciousness that occurs in liver failure.
amnesia Loss of ability to memorize
information and/or to recall information
stored in  memory. Possible causes of
amnesia are  head injury; degenerative
disorders such as  Alzheimer＊s disease
and other forms of dementia; infections
such as  encephalitis; thiamine defici-
ency in alcoholics, leading to Wernicke每
Korsakoff syndrome;  brain tumours;
strokes; and subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Amnesia can also occur in some forms
of psychiatric illness. 
In retrograde amnesia, the loss of
memory extends back for some time
before the onset of the disorder. In
anterograde amnesia, there is an inabil-
ity to store new information in the
period following the onset of illness. 
amniocentesis A diagnostic procedure
in which a small amount of  amniotic
fluid is withdrawn, using a syringe and
guided by ultrasound scanning, from
the  amniotic sac that surrounds the
fetus in the  uterus. This fluid contains
fetal cells that can be subjected to
chromosome analysis to identify chromo-
somal defects such as Down＊s syndrome
or genetic analysis to look for  genetic
AMILORIDE AMNIOCENTESIS
A27
disorders such as  haemophilia, cystic
fibrosis, and  Tay每Sachs disease. Chemi-
cal analysis of amniotic fluid can help
to diagnose developmental abnorm-
alities such as  spina bifida.  Rhesus
incompatibility and maturity of the fetal
lungs can also be checked. 
Amniocentesis is usually performed in
the 14th每18th week of pregnancy.It
slightly increases the risk of miscarriage
or early rupture of the membranes and is
therefore recommended only when the
fetus is thought to be at increased risk
of an abnormality. (See also  antenatal
care, chorionic villus sampling.)
amnion One of the membranes that
surrounds the  fetus in the  uterus. The
outside of the amnion is covered by
another membrane called the chorion.
amniotic fluid The clear, watery fluid
(popularly called the ※waters§) that sur-
rounds the fetus in the uterus. The fluid
is contained within the  amniotic sac. It
cushions the fetus, allowing movement.
Amniotic fluid is produced by cells lin-
ing the amniotic sac and is constantly
circulated. It appears in the 1st week
after conception and gradually in-
creases in volume until the 10th week,
when the increase becomes very rapid.
Occasionally, excessive fluid is formed
(see  polyhydramnios); less frequently,
insufficient amniotic fluidis formed
(see oligohydramnios).
amniotic sac The membranous bag that
surrounds the  fetus and is filled with
amniotic fluid as pregnancy advances.
The sac is made up of 2 membranes, the
inner amnion and the outer chorion.
amniotomy Artificial rupture of the am-
niotic membranes (breaking the ※waters§)
performed for induction of labour.
amoeba A type of protozoon (see proto-
zoa). An amoeba is a microscopic
single-celled organism with an irregular,
changeable shape. Amoebae live in
moist environments, such as fresh
water and soil. Some types of amoebae
are parasites of humans, causing dis-
eases such as amoebiasis.
amoebiasis An infection caused by the
amoeba  ENTAMOEBA HISTOLYTICA, a tiny
single-celled parasite that lives in the
human large intestine. Amoebiasis is
spread through drinking water or eating
food contaminated by human excreta
containing cysts of the amoeba.
Some people carry the amoeba in their
intestines and excrete cysts but have no
symptoms. However, some strains in-
vade and ulcerate the intestinal wall,
causing diarrhoea and abdominal pain,
which may develop into full-blown
dysentery. The amoebae may spread via
the bloodstream to the liver, or, rarely,
the brain or lung, where they  cause
abscesses. Symptoms of an amoebic
liver abscess are chills, fever, weight
loss, and painful enlargement of the liver.
Treatment of all forms of amoebiasis
is with drugs such as metronidazole or
diloxanide, which kill the parasite with-
in a few weeks, leading to full recovery.
amoebic dysentery See amoebiasis.
amoebicides A group of drugs used to
treat  amoebiasis. Examples are dilox-
anide, and metronidazole. 
amoxapine An  antidepressantdrug  re-
lated to the tricyclics. Possible adverse
effects include blurred vision, dizziness,
drowsiness, abnormal muscular move-
ments, menstrual irregularities, and
breast enlargement.
amoxicillin A penicillin drug commonly
used to treat a variety of infections,
AMOXICILLIN AMNION
A
Ultrasound
beam
Ultrasound
probe
Bladder
Amniotic
fluid
Syringe
Fetus
Cervix
Uterus Placenta
AMNIOCENTESIS28
including bronchitis, cystitis,and ear and
skin infections. Allergy to amoxicillin
causes a blotchy rash and, rarely, fever,
swelling of the mouth and tongue, itch-
ing, and breathing difficulty.
amoxycillin See amoxicillin.
amphetamine drugs See  amfetamine
drugs.
amphotericin B A drug used to treat
fungal infections. Lozenges are used for
candidiasis of the mouth. Life-threaten-
ing infections, such as  cryptococcosis
and histoplasmosis, are treated by injec-
tion.  Adverse effects may occur with
injection and include vomiting, fever,
headache, and, rarely, seizures.
ampicillin A  penicillin drug commonly
used to treat cystitis, bronchitis, and ear
infections. Diarrhoea is a common
adverse effect of ampicillin. Some peo-
ple are allergic to it and suffer from
rash, fever, swelling of the mouth and
tongue, itching, and breathing difficulty.
ampulla An enlarged, flask-shaped area
at the end of a tubular structure or
canal. There are several ampullae in the
body, including at the end of the fallo-
pian tubes, at the opening of the bile
duct into the intestine, and on each of
the semicircular canals of the inner ear. 
amputation Surgical removal of part or
all of a limb. Amputation is necessary if
peripheral vascular disease as a result of
atherosclerosis or  diabetes mellitus has
impaired the blood supply to a limb. If
blood supply cannot be restored, ampu-
tation is carried out to prevent the
development of  gangrene. Amputation
may also be needed if a limb has been
irreparably damaged in an accident.
For some time after amputation, there
may be an unpleasant sensation that the
limb is still present, a phenomenon
known as ※phantom limb§. A prosthesis
(see  limb, artificial) is usually fitted
when the stump has healed. 
amputation, congenital The separa-
tion of a body part (usually a limb,
finger, or toe) from the rest of the body,
as a result of the part＊s blood supply
being blocked by a band of  amnion
(fetal membrane) in the uterus. The
affected part may be completely separ-
ated or show the marks of the ※amniotic
band§ after birth. (See also limb defects.)
amputation, traumatic Loss of a fin-
ger, toe, or limb through injury. (See
also microsurgery.)
amylase An enzyme found in saliva and
pancreatic secretions (see pancreas). It
helps to digest dietary starch, breaking
it down into smaller components such
as the sugars glucose and maltose.
amyl nitrite A nitrate drug formerly pre-
scribed to relieve angina. Because amyl
nitrite frequently causes adverse effects,
it has been superseded by other drugs. It
is sometimes abused for its effect of
intensifying pleasure during orgasm.
amyloidosis An uncommon disease in
which a substance called amyloid, com-
posed of fibrous protein, accumulates
in tissues and organs, including the
liver, kidneys, tongue, spleen, and heart.
Amyloidosis may occur for no known
reason, in which case it is called primary;
more commonly, it is a complication of
some other disease, and in such cases
it is called secondary. Conditions that
may lead to amyloidosis include multi-
ple myeloma (a cancer of bone marrow),
rheumatoid arthritis,  tuberculosis, and
some other  longstanding infections,
such as chronic osteomyelitis. 
The symptoms of amyloidosis vary,
depending on the organs affected and
the duration of the condition. Deposits
of amyloid in the kidneys may cause
kidney failure, which may be fatal.
There is no treatment, but secondary
amyloidosis can be halted if the under-
lying disorder is treated.
AMOXYCILLIN AMYLOIDOSIS
A
Outer
ear
Middle
ear
Inner
ear
Semicircular canal
AMPULLA
Ampulla
LOCATION
INNER EAR
Cochlea
Cochlea29
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis See
motor neuron disease.
amyotrophy Shrinkage or wasting away
of a muscle,  leading to weakness.Amy-
otrophy is usually due to poor nutrition,
reduced use of the muscle (as when a
limb is immobilized for a long period),
or disruption of the blood or nerve sup-
ply to the muscle (as  can occur in
diabetes mellitus or poliomyelitis).
anabolic steroids See steroids, anabolic.
anabolism The manufacture of complex
molecules, such as  fats and  proteins,
from simpler molecules by metabolic
processes in living cells. (See also
catabolism; metabolism.)
anaemia A condition in which the con-
centration of the oxygen-carrying pigment
haemoglobin in the blood is below nor-
mal. Haemoglobin molecules are carried
inside red  bloodcells and transport
oxygen from the lungs to the tissues.
Normally, stable haemoglobin concen-
trations in the blood are maintained by
a balance between red-cell production
in the bone marrow and red-cell des-
truction in the spleen. Anaemia may
result if this balance is upset. 
Anaemia is not a disease but a feature
of many different disorders. There are
various types, which can be classified
into those due to decreased or defective
red-cell production by bone marrow (see
anaemia, aplastic; anaemia, megaloblastic;
anaemia, iron-deficiency) and those due
to decreased survival of the red cells in
the blood (see anaemia, haemolytic).
The severity of symptoms depends on
how low the haemoglobin concentra-
tion has become. Slightly reduced
levels can cause headaches, tiredness,
and lethargy. Severely reduced levels
can cause breathing difficulty on exer-
cise, dizziness, angina, and palpitations.
General signs include pallor, particular-
ly of the skin creases, the lining of the
mouth, and the inside of the eyelids. 
Anaemia is diagnosed from the symp-
toms and by blood tests (see  blood
count; blood film). A bone marrow biop-
sy may be needed if the problem is with
red blood cell production.
anaemia, aplastic A rare but serious
type of  anaemia in which the red cells,
white cells, and platelets in the blood
are all reduced in number. Aplastic
anaemia is caused by a failure of the
bone marrow to produce stem cells, the
initial form of all blood cells. 
Treatment of cancer with radiotherapy
or  anticancer drugs can temporarily
interfere with the cell-producing ability
of bone marrow, as can certain viral
infections and other drugs. Long-term
exposure to insecticides or benzene
fumes may cause more persistent aplas-
tic anaemia, and a moderate to high
dose of nuclear radiation is another
recognized cause. An  autoimmune dis-
order is responsible in about half of 
all cases. Aplastic anaemia sometimes
develops for no known reason. 
A low level of red blood cells may
cause symptoms common to all types
of anaemia, such as fatigue and breath-
lessness. White-cell deficiency increases
susceptibility to infections; platelet defi-
ciency may lead to a tendency to bruise
easily, bleeding gums, and nosebleeds. 
The disorder is usually suspected from
blood-test results, particularly a  blood
count, and is confirmed by a bone marrow
biopsy. Blood and platelet transfusions
can control symptoms. Immunosuppres-
sion is used to treat anaemia due to an
autoimmune process. Severe persistent
aplastic anaemia may be fatal unless a
bone marrow transplant is carried out.
anaemia, haemolytic A form of anaemia
caused by premature destruction of red
cells in the bloodstream (haemolysis).
Haemolytic anaemias can be classified
according to whether the cause of haem-
olysis is inside or outside the red cells. 
When haemolysis is due to a defect
inside the red cells, the underlying
problem is abnormal rigidity of the cell
membrane. This causes the cells to
become trapped, at an early stage of
their life-span, in the small blood vessels
of the spleen, where they are destroyed
by macrophages (cells that ingest for-
eign particles). Abnormal rigidity may
result from an inherited defect of the
cell membrane (as in hereditary sphero-
cytosis), a defect of the haemoglobin in
the cell (as in  sickle-cell anaemia), or a
defect of one of the cell＊s enzymes.An
inherited deficiency of the glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase enzyme (see
ANAEMIA, HAEMOLYTIC AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS
A30
G6PD deficiency) may result in episodes
of haemolytic  anaemia since the red
cells are prone to damage by infectious
illness or certain drugs or foods.
Haemolytic anaemias due to defects
outside the red cells fall into 3 main
groups. First are disorders in which red
cells are destroyed by buffeting (by arti-
ficial surfaces such as replacement heart
valves, abnormal blood-vessel linings, or
a blood clot in a vessel, for example). In
the 2nd group, the red  cells are des-
troyed by the  immune system. Immune
haemolytic anaemias may occur if for-
eign blood cells enter the bloodstream,
as occurs in an incompatible blood
transfusion, or they may be due to an
autoimmune disorder. In haemolytic dis-
ease of the newborn, the baby＊s red cells
are destroyed by the mother＊s antibodies
crossing the placenta. Thirdly, the red
cells may be destroyed by microorgan-
isms; the most common cause is malaria.
People with haemolytic anaemia may
have symptoms common to all types of
anaemia, such as fatigue and breathless-
ness,  or symptoms specifically due to
haemolysis, such as jaundice.
Diagnosis is made by examination of
the blood (see blood film). Some inher-
ited anaemias can be controlled by
removing the spleen (see splenectomy).
Others, such as G6PD deficiency, can 
be prevented by avoiding the drugs 
or foods that precipitate haemolysis.
Anaemias due to immune processes
can often be controlled by  immunosup-
pressant drugs. Transfusions of red cells
are sometimes needed for emergency
treatment of life-threatening anaemia. 
anaemia, iron-deficiency The most
common form of  anaemia caused by a
deficiency of iron, an essential constit-
uent of haemoglobin. The main cause of
iron-deficiency anaemia is iron loss due
to heavy or persistent bleeding; the most
common cause in women of childbear-
ing age is menstruation. Other causes
include blood loss from the digestive
tract due to disorders such as erosive
gastritis,  peptic ulcer,  stomach cancer,
inflammatory bowel disease,  haemor-
rhoids, and bowel tumours (see  colon,
cancer of). Prolonged use of aspirin 
and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs  (NSAIDs) can cause gastrointes-
tinal bleeding. In some countries, hook-
worm infestation of the digestive tract is
an important cause of anaemia. Rarely,
bleeding may also occur as a result of
disorders of the urinary tract (such as
kidney tumours or bladder tumours).
Iron deficiency may also be caused or
worsened by lack of iron in, or its poor
absorption from, the diet.
The symptoms are those of the under-
lying cause, along with a sore mouth or
tongue, and those common to all forms
of anaemia, such as fatigue and breath-
lessness. The diagnosis is made from
blood tests and tests to look for an
underlying cause. Treatment is given for
the cause, along  with a course of iron
tablets or, very rarely, injections.
anaemia, megaloblastic An important
type of anaemia caused by a deficiency
of vitamin B12 or another vitamin, folic
acid. Either of these deficiencies seri-
ously interferes with production of red
blood cells in the bone marrow. An
excess of cells called megaloblasts ap-
pears in the marrow. Megaloblasts give
rise to enlarged and deformed red
blood cells known as macrocytes. 
Vitamin B12 is found only in foods of
animal origin, such as meat and dairy
products. It is absorbed from the small
intestine after first combining with
intrinsic factor, a chemical produced by
the stomach lining. The most common
cause of vitamin B12 deficiency is failure
of the stomach lining to produce intrin-
sic factor, usually due to an autoimmune
disorder; this is called pernicious anae-
mia. Total  gastrectomy (removal of the
stomach) prevents production of intrin-
sic factor, and removalof part of the
small intestine prevents B12 absorption,
as does the intestinal disorder Crohn＊s
disease. In a minority of cases, vitamin
B12 deficiency is due to a vegan diet.
Folic acid is found mainly in green
vegetables and liver. The usual cause of
deficiency is a poor diet. Deficiency can
also be caused by anything that inter-
feres with the absorption of folic acid
from the small intestine (for example
Crohn＊s disease or coeliac disease). Folic
acid requirements are greater than nor-
mal in pregnancy.
ANAEMIA, IRON-DEFICIENCYANAEMIA, MEGALOBLASTIC
AMany people with mild megaloblastic
anaemia have no symptoms. Others
may experience tiredness, headaches, a
sore mouth and tongue, and mild  jaun-
dice. If B12 deficiency continues for a
long time, additional symptoms due to
nerve damage, including numbness and
tingling in the feet, may develop.
Megaloblastic anaemia is diagnosed
by blood tests and a bone marrow biopsy.
Megaloblastic anaemia due to poor diet
can be remedied with a short course of
vitamin B12 injections or folic acid tab-
lets and the introduction of a normal
diet. A lifelong course of vitamin B12
injections or folic acid tablets is
required if the underlying cause of mal-
absorption is untreatable. 
anaemia, pernicious See anaemia, meg-
aloblastic.
anaerobic Capable of living, function-
ing, and growing without oxygen. Many
bacteria are anaerobic. Some human
body cells are capable of limited anaer-
obic activity. When muscular exertion is
so strenuous  that oxygen is used faster
than the bloodcirculation can supply it,
such as during sprinting, muscle  cells
temporarily work anaerobically.When
this happens, lactic acid is produced as
waste (instead of  the carbon dioxide
from aerobic activity), sometimes causing
muscle fatigue and pain. 
anaesthesia Absence of all sensation;
insensibility. The term most commonly
refers to anaesthesia that is induced
artificially for medical purposes. Two
types of anaesthesia are used: local
(see anaesthesia, local) and general (see
anaesthesia, general).
Damage to nerve tissues by injury or
disease can produce anaesthesia in a
localized area. 
anaesthesia, dental Loss of sensation
induced in a patient to prevent pain
during dental treatment.
For minor procedures, a  local anaes-
thetic (see anaesthesia, local) is injected
either into  the gum at the site being
treated or into the nerve a short dis-
tance away(called a peripheral nerve
block). In addition, topical anaesthetics
are often used on the gums. For more
complicated procedures, such as perio-
dontal (gum) surgery and multiple
tooth extractions, general anaesthesia
is carried out (see anaesthesia, general).
anaesthesia, general Loss of sensation
and consciousness induced to prevent
the perception of pain throughout the
ANAESTHESIA, GENERAL ANAEMIA, PERNICIOUS
A
Monitor displays heart-
rate, blood pressure, and
oxygen levels in blood
Anaesthetist
records vital signs
and drugs used
Endotracheal tube
delivers gases to patient
ANAESTHESIA, GENERAL
31
ECGleads on the 
chest connect to monitor
Flow, concentration, and
mixture of gases are regulated
by anaesthetic machine32
body during surgery. General anaesth-
esia is  usually induced by intravenous
injection of a  barbiturate drug and
maintained by inhalation of anaesthetic
gases such as halothane, which may be
introduced into the lungs via an  endo-
tracheal tube. During the anaesthetic,
the pulse, blood pressure, and other
vital signs are continuously monitored.
General anaesthetics have become
much safer, and serious complications
are rare. However, severe pre-existing
diseases such as lung or heart disorders
increase the risks. Minor after effects such
as nausea and vomiting are usually con-
trolled effectively with antiemetic drugs.
anaesthesia, local Loss of sensation
induced in a limited region of the body
to prevent pain during examinations,
diagnostic or treatment procedures, and
surgical operations. Local anaesthesia
is produced by the administration of
drugs that temporarily interrupt the
action of pain-carrying nerve fibres.
Local anaesthetics applied topically
before injections or blood tests include
sprays and skin creams and ointments.
These are often used for children. For
minor surgical procedures, such as
stitching of small wounds, local anaes-
thesia is usually produced by direct
injection into the area to be treated. To
anaesthetize a large area, or when local
injection would not penetrate deeply
enough into body tissues, a nerve block
may be used. Nerves can also be
blocked where they branch off from the
spinal cord, as in  epidural anaesthesia,
which is widely used in childbirth, and
spinal anaesthesia, which is used for
surgery on the lower limbs and abdomen.
Serious reactions to local anaesthetics
are uncommon. Repeated use of topical
preparations may cause allergic rashes.
anaesthetics A term for the group of
drugs that produce  anaesthesia and for
the medical discipline concerned with
their administration.
anal dilatation A procedure for enlarg-
ing the anus. Anal dilatation is used to
treat conditions in which the anus be-
comes too tight, such as  anal stenosis
and anal fissure. It is also used to treat
haemorrhoids. Anal dilatation is usually
performed under general anaesthesia.
Reflex anal dilatation, in which the anus
dilates in response to local contact,
may occur in certain anal disorders or
after repeated anal penetration. 
anal discharge The loss of mucus, pus,
or blood from the anus. Haemorrhoids,
anal fissures, and  proctitis (inflam-
mation of  the rectum) can all cause 
anal discharge.
analeptic drugs Drugs that stimulate
breathing. Replaced by ventilation, they
are seldom used now. 
anal fissure A common anal disorder
caused by an elongated ulcer or tear
that extends upwards into the anal
canal from  the anal sphincter. A fissure
may be caused by the passage of hard,
dry faeces. There is usually pain during
defaecation and the muscles of the
anus may go into spasm. There may be
a small amount of bright red blood on
faeces or toilet paper. 
The tear often heals naturally over a
few days. Treatment of recurrent or per-
sistent fissures is by anal dilatation and
a high-fibre diet, which helps soften the
faeces. Surgery to remove the fissure is
occasionally necessary.
anal fistula An abnormal channel con-
necting the inside of the anal canal with
the skin surrounding the anus.
An anal fistula may be an indication of
Crohn＊s disease, colitis, or cancer of the
colon or rectum (see  colon, cancer of;
rectum, cancer of). In most cases, it
results from an  abscess that develops
for unknown reasons in the anal wall.
The abscess discharges pus into the anus
and out on to the surrounding skin.
An anal fistula is treated surgically 
by opening the abnormal channel and
removing the lining. The wound is then
left to heal naturally.
analgesia Loss or reduction of pain
sensation. Analgesia differs from anaes-
thesia in that sensitivity to touch is still
preserved. (See also analgesic drugs.) 
analgesic drugs Drugs used to relieve
pain. The 2 main types  are nonopioid
and  opioid. Nonopioid analgesics,
which include aspirin, paracetamol, and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatorydrugs
(NSAIDs), are useful in the treatment of
mild to moderate pain (for example,
headache or toothache). Combinations
ANAESTHESIA, LOCAL ANALGESIC DRUGS
A33
of a weak opioid analgesic, such as
codeine, with a nonopioid analgesic
relieve more severe pain. Potent opioids
such as morphine are used only when
other preparations would be ineffective
because they can produce  tolerance
and drug dependence.
Adverse effects are uncommon with
paracetamol. Aspirin and NSAIDs may
irritate the stomach lining and cause
nausea, abdominal pain, and, rarely, a
peptic ulcer. Nausea, drowsiness, con-
stipation, and breathing difficulties may
occur with opioid analgesics.
anal stenosis A tightness of the anus,
sometimes referred to as anal stricture.
Anal stenosis prevents the normal pas-
sage of faeces, causing constipation and
pain during defaecation. The condition
may be present from birth, or may be
caused by a number of conditions in
which scarring has occurred, such as
anal fissure, colitis, or cancer of the anus.
Anal stenosis sometimes occurs after
surgery on the anus (for example, to
treat  haemorrhoids). The condition is
treated by anal dilatation. 
anal stricture See anal stenosis.
anal tag A type of skin tag.
analysis,chemical Determination of
the identity of a substance or of the
individual chemical constituents of a
mixture. Analysis may be qualitative, as
in determining whether a particular
substance is present, or it may be quan-
titative, that is, measuring the amount
or concentration of one or more consti-
tuents. (See also assay.)
analysis,psychological See  psycho-
analysis.
anaphylactic shock A rare, life-threat-
ening allergic reaction that occurs in
people with an extreme sensitivity to a
particular substance (allergen), often in-
sect venom, a food item, or a drug (see
allergy). When the allergen enters the
bloodstream, massive amounts of hista-
mine and other chemicals are released,
causing sudden, severe lowering of
blood pressure and constriction of the
airways. Other symptoms may include
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, swelling of
the tongue and throat, and itchy rash. 
Anaphylactic shock requires emerg-
ency medical treatment. An injection of
adrenaline may be life-saving.  Antihis-
tamine drugs and  corticosteroid drugs
may also be given.
anastomosis A natural or artificial
communication between 2  blood ves-
sels or tubular cavities that may or may
not normally be joined. Natural anasto-
moses usually occur when small arteries
are attached directly to  veins without
passing through capillaries. They occur
in the skin and are used to help control
temperature regulation. Surgical anas-
tomoses are used to create a bypass
around a blockage in an artery or in the
intestine. They are also used to rejoin
cut ends of the bowel or blood vessels.
(See also bypass surgery.)
anatomy The structure of the body of
any living thing, and its scientific study.
Human anatomy, together with physiol-
ogy (the study of the functioning of the
body), forms the foundation of medical
science. Anatomy is subdivided into
many branches. These include compara-
tive anatomy (the study of the differences
between human and animal bodies),
surgical anatomy (the practical know-
ledge required by surgeons), embryology
(the study of structural changes that
occur during the development of the
embryo and fetus), systematic anatomy
(the study of the structure of particular
body systems), and cytology and histol-
ogy (the microscopic study of cells and
tissues respectively).
ancylostomiasis See  hookworm infes-
tation.
androgen drugs Natural or synthetic
androgen hormones used as drugs; one
of the most important is  testosterone.
These drugs are used in the treatment
of male hypogonadism (underactivityof
the testes) to stimulatethe development
of sexual characteristics.
Androgen drugs are occasionally used
to treat certain types of  breast cancer.
They have been widely used by sports-
men wishing to increase muscle bulk
and strength, a practice that is danger-
ous to health (see steroids, anabolic).
Adverse effects include fluid retention,
weight gain, increased blood cholesterol,
and, rarely, liver damage. When taken by
women, the drugs can cause male char-
acteristics, such as facial hair, to develop.
ANDROGEN DRUGS ANAL STENOSIS
A34
androgen hormones A group of hor-
mones that stimulate the development
of male sexual characteristics.
Androgens are produced by special-
ized cells in the testes in males and in
the adrenal glands in both sexes. The
ovaries secrete very small quantities of
androgens until the menopause. The
most active androgen is  testosterone,
which is produced in the testes. The
production of androgens by the testes
is controlled by certain pituitary hor-
mones, called  gonadotrophins. Adrenal
androgens are controlled by  ACTH,
another pituitary hormone.
Androgens stimulate male secondary
sexual characteristics at  puberty, such
as the growth of facial hair and deepen-
ing of the voice. They have an anabolic
effect (they raise the rate of protein syn-
thesis and lower the rate at which it is
broken down). This increases muscle
bulk and accelerates growth. At the end
of puberty, androgens cause the long
bones to stop growing. They stimulate
sebum secretion, which, if excessive,
causes  acne. In early adult life, andro-
gens promote male-pattern baldness. 
Androgen deficiency may occur if the
testes are diseased or if the pituitary
gland fails to secrete gonadotrophins.
Typical effects include decreased body
and facial hair, a high-pitched voice,
underdevelopment of the genitalia, and
poor muscle development.
Overproduction of androgens may be
the result of adrenal disorders (see
adrenal tumours;  adrenal hyperplasia,
congenital), of testicular tumours (see
testis, cancer of), or, rarely, of androgen-
secreting ovarian tumours (see  ovary,
cancer of). In men, excess androgens
accentuate male characteristics; in boys,
they cause premature sexual develop-
ment. In women, excess androgens cause
virilization, the development of mascu-
line features such as an increase in
body hair, deepening of the voice, cli-
toral enlargement, and amenorrhoea.
anencephaly Absence of the brain and
cranial vault (top of the skull) at birth.
Most infants with anencephaly are still-
born or survive only a few hours.
Anencephaly is detectable early in preg-
nancy by measurement of the maternal
alpha-fetoprotein, by  ultrasound scan-
ning, by amniocentesis, or by  fetoscopy;
if anencephaly is detected, termination
of the pregnancy may be considered.
Anencephaly is due to a failure in the
development of the neural tube, which
is the nerve tissue in the embryo that
normally develops into the spinal cord
and brain. (See also neural tube defects.)
aneurysm Abnormal dilation (balloon-
ing) of an artery caused by the pressure
of blood flowing through a weakened
area. Aneurysms most commonly affect
the aorta and arteries supplying the brain.
The most common cause of an aneu-
rysm is  atherosclerosis, a condition in
which fatty deposits weaken the artery
wall. The aorta is the usual site of
atherosclerotic aneurysms.
Less commonly, aneurysms may be
due to a congenital weakness of the
artery walls. Most cerebral aneurysms,
known as berry aneurysms because of
their appearance, are congenital. Mar-
fan＊s syndrome, an inherited disorder in
which the muscular layer of the aorta 
is defective, is often associated with
aneurysms just above the heart. The
arterial wall can
also be weakened
by inflammation,
as occurs in poly-
arteritis nodosa. 
Most aneurysms
are symptomless
and remain un-
detected, but if
the aneurysm ex-
pands rapidly and
causes pain, or it
is very large, the
symptoms are due
to pressure on
nearby structures.
Aneurysms may
eventually rupture, cause fatal blood
loss, or, in the case of a cerebral
aneurysm, loss of consciousness (see
subarachnoid haemorrhage). 
In some cases, only the inner layer of
the artery wall ruptures, which allows
blood to track along the length of the
artery and block any branching arteries.
There is usually severe pain and high
risk of rupture occurring. 
ANDROGEN HORMONES ANEURYSM
A
Fatty
deposit
Weakened, bulging
artery wall
ANEURYSM35
Aneurysms sometimes develop in the
heart wall due to weakening of an area
of heart muscle as a result of myocar-
dial  infarction. Such aneurysms seldom
rupture but interfere with the pumping
action of the heart.
Aneurysms of the aorta may be detec-
ted by ultrasound scanning, and cerebral
aneurysms by CT scanning or MRI. Angi-
ography provides information on all
types of aneurysm. Ruptured or enlarged
aneurysms require immediate surgery
(see arterial reconstructive surgery).
angina A strangling or constrictive pain.
Angina has become synonymous with
the heart disorder angina pectoris. Other
types of angina include abdominal angi-
na (abdominal pain after eating caused
by poor blood supply to the intestines)
and Vincent＊s angina, pain caused by
inflammation of the mouth (see  Vin-
cent＊s disease).
angina pectoris Pain in the chest due
to insufficient oxygen being carried to the
heart muscle in the blood.
Inadequate blood supply to the heart
is usually due to  coronary artery dis-
ease. Other causes include coronary
artery spasm, in which the blood ves-
sels narrow suddenly for a short time,
aortic stenosis, in which the aortic valve
in the heart is narrowed, and  arrhyth-
mias. If the pain of angina pectoris
continues, it may be due to myocardial
infarction. Rare causes include severe
anaemia and polycythaemia, which thick-
ens the blood, causing its flow through
the heart muscle to slow. 
The pain usually starts in the centre of
the chest but can spread to the throat,
upper jaw, back, and arms (usually the
left one) or between the shoulder-
blades. The pain usually comes on
when the heart is working harder and
requires more oxygen, for example dur-
ing exercise. Angina developing during
sleep or without provocation is known
as unstable angina. Other symptoms
may include nausea, sweating, dizzi-
ness, and breathing difficulty.
Diagnostic tests usually include an
ECG, which may register normal be-
tween attacks, and a cardiac stress test.
Blood tests and coronary  angiography
may also be performed.
To help control the symptoms, it is
important to stop smoking and to lose
weight if necessary. Attacks of angina
pectoris may be prevented and treated
by nitrate drugs. However, if nitrates are
not effective or are causing side effects,
beta-blocker drugs or  calcium channel
blockers may be used.
Drug treatment can control the symp-
toms for many years. If attacks become
more severe or more frequent, despite
treatment,  coronary artery bypass sur-
gery or angioplasty may be necessary.
angioedema A type of reaction caused
by allergy. Angioedema is characterized
by large, well-defined swellings, of sud-
den onset, in the skin, larynx (voice-
box), and other areas.
The most common cause is a sudden
allergic reaction to a food. Less common-
ly,it results from allergy to a drug (such
as penicillin), a reaction to an insect bite
or sting, or from infection, emotional
stress, or exposure to animals, moulds,
pollens, or cold conditions. There is
also a hereditary form of the disease.
Angioedema may cause sudden diffi-
culty in breathing, swallowing, and
speaking, accompanied by swelling of
the lips, face, and neck, depending on
the area of the body affected. Angio-
edema that affects the throat and the
larynx is potentially life-threatening
because the swelling can block the air-
way, causing asphyxia.
Severe cases are treated with injections
of adrenaline (epinephrine) and may re-
quire intubation (passage of a breathing
tube via the mouth into the windpipe)
or  tracheostomy (surgical creation of a
hole in the windpipe) to prevent suffo-
cation. Corticosteroid drugs may also be
given. In less severe cases, antihistamine
drugs may relieve symptoms.
angiogenesis The growth of new blood
vessels. Angiogenesis is the process
that enables tumours to grow; cancer-
ous cells produce chemicals (called
growth factors) that stimulate new
blood vessels to form near the tumour,
supplying it with nutrients.
angiography An imaging procedure
that enables blood vessels to be seen
clearly on X-ray film following the injec-
tion of a contrast medium (a substance
ANGIOGRAPHY ANGINA
A36
that is opaque to X-rays). Angiography
is used to detect conditions that alter
the appearance of blood vessels, such
as aneurysm, and narrowing or blockage
of blood vessels by atherosclerosis, or by
a thrombus or embolus. It is also used to
detect changes in the pattern of blood
vessels that supply organs injured or
affected by a tumour. 
Carotid angiography (of the arteries in
the neck) may be used to investigate
transient ischaemic attacks. Cerebral ang-
iography can be used to detect an
aneurysm in the brain or pinpoint the
position of a brain tumour. Coronary
angiography, often combined with car-
diac  catheterization, can identify the
sitesof narrowing or blockage in coron-
ary artery disease. Digital subtraction
angiography uses computer techniques
to process images and remove unwant-
ed background information. 
Angiographic techniqueshave been
adapted to allow certain treatments that,
in some cases, eliminate the need for
surgery (see angioplasty, balloon;embol-
ization). (See also aortography.)
angioma A noncancerous tumour made
up of blood vessels (see haemangioma)
or lymph vessels (see lymphangioma).
angioplasty, balloon A technique for
treating a narrowed or blocked section
of blood vessel by introducing a catheter
with a balloon into the constricted area.
The balloon is inflated to widen the nar-
rowed area, deflated again, and then
removed. Balloon angioplasty is used to
restore blood flow in peripheral vascular
disease and coronary artery disease. 
Coronary balloon angioplasty is usually
successful, but the narrowing may recur
ANGIOMA ANHEDONIA
A
Inflated balloon
Compressed 
fatty deposit
Catheter
Deflated
balloon
Narrowed
area
BALLOON IN POSITION BALLOON INFLATED
Artery wall
ANGIOPLASTY, BALLOON
in the affected vessel, requiring repeat
treatment. Angioplasty of peripheral ves-
sels is most successful in treating the
iliac and femoral arteries in the legs. 
angiotensin The name of 2 related pro-
teins involved in regulating blood
pressure. The 1st, angiotensin I, is inac-
tive and is formed when renin, which is
produced by the kidneys, acts on the
substance angiotensinogen. Angioten-
sin I is then converted tothe second,
active, form, angiotensin II, by angio-
tensin-converting enzyme. Angiotensin II
causes narrowing of the small blood
vessels in tissues, resulting in increased
blood pressure. It also stimulates re-
lease (from the adrenal cortex, the outer
part of each  adrenal gland) of the hor-
mone aldosterone, which also increases
blood pressure.
Certain kidney disorders can increase
the production of angiotensin II, caus-
ing hypertension. Whatever the cause of
hypertension, it may be treated with
drugs called ACE inhibitors, which work
by reducing angiotensin II formation. 
angiotensin converting enzyme A
substance that converts angiotensin I to
its active form, angiotensin II. Drugs
that reduce the action of this enzyme
are known as  ACE inhibitor drugs and
are used in the treatment of hyperten-
sion and heart failure.
angiotensin II antagonists A group
of drugs used in the treatment of hyper-
tension (high blood pressure). They
have a similar action to ACE inhibitors
but do not cause a dry cough. Examples
are losartan and valsartan.
anhedonia  Total loss of the feeling 
of pleasure from activities that would37
normally give pleasure. Anhedonia is
often a symptom of depression.
anhidrosis Complete absence of sweat-
ing. (See also hypohidrosis.)
animal experimentation The use of
animals in research to provide informa-
tion about animal biology or, by infer-
ence, human physiology or behaviour.
Animalresearch has contributed to the
development of drugs, such as vaccines,
and surgical techniques, such as trans-
plant surgery. However, because of
ethical concerns, alternative practices,
such as cell cultures, are now used
wherever possible.
animals, diseases from See zoonosis.
anisometropia Unequal focusing power
in the 2 eyes, usually due to a difference
in size and/or shape of the eyes, that
causes visual discomfort. For example,
one eye may be normal and the other
affected by  myopia (shortsightedness),
hypermetropia (longsightedness),or
astigmatism (uneven curvature of the
cornea). Glasses or contact lenses cor-
rect the problem in most cases. 
ankle joint The hinge joint between the
foot and the leg. The talus (uppermost
bone in the foot) fits between the 2 bony
protuberances formed by the lowerends
of the tibia (the
shinbone) and the
fibula (the outer
bone of the lower
leg). Strong liga-
ments on either
side of the ankle
joint give it sup-
port. The ankle
allows for up-and-
down movement
of the foot.
An ankle sprain is
one of the most
common injuries. It is usually caused by
twisting the foot over on to its outside
edge, causing overstretching and bruis-
ing of the ligaments. Violent twisting of
the ankle can cause a combined fracture
and dislocation known as Pott＊s fracture.
ankylosing spondylitis An uncommon
inflammatory disease affecting joints
between the vertebrae of the spine and
the sacroiliac joints (joints between the
spine and pelvis).
The cause of ankylosing spondylitis is
usually unknown, but in some cases the
disease may be associated with  colitis
(inflammation of the colon) or psoriasis
(a skin disease). Ankylosing spondylitis
may run in families; and about 90 per-
cent of people with the condition have
the genetically determined histocompat-
ibility antigen (HLA-B27).
Ankylosing spondylitis usually starts
with pain and stiffness in the hips and
lower back, which are worse after rest-
ing and are especially noticeable in the
early morning Other, less common, symp-
toms include chest pain, painful heels
due to additional bone formation, and
redness and pain in the eyes due to iri-
tis. In time, inflammation in the spine
can lead to  ankylosis  (permanent stiff-
ness and limited movement) and kyphosis
(curvature of the spine). 
The condition is diagnosed by X-rays
and  blood tests. There is no cure but
treatment with exercises, physiotherapy,
and anti-inflammatory drugs can reduce
the pain and limitation of movement. 
ankylosis Complete loss of movement
in a joint caused by fusion of the bony
surfaces. Ankylosis may be due to de-
generation as a result of inflammation,
infection, or injury, or be produced sur-
gically by surgery to fuse a diseased
joint to correct deformity or to alleviate
persistent pain (see arthrodesis).
anodontia Failure of some or all of the
teeth to develop. It may be due to
absence of tooth buds at birth or the
result of damage to developing tooth
buds by infection or other widespread
disease. If only a few teeth are missing,
a bridge can fill the gap; if all the teeth
are missing, a denture is needed. 
anomaly A deviation from what is ac-
cepted as normal, especially a birth
defect such as a limb malformation.
anorexia The medical term for loss of
appetite (see appetite, loss of).
anorexia nervosa An eating disorder
characterized by severe weight loss and
altered self-image that leads sufferers
to believe they are fat when they are, 
in fact, dangerously underweight. Anor-
exia nervosa most often affects teenage
girls and young women, but the inci-
dence in young men is rising.
ANOREXIA NERVOSA ANHIDROSIS
A
Calcaneous
ANKLE JOINT
Fibula
Talus
Ankle joint
Tibia38
The causes of anorexia are unclear, but
the condition may be linked to a lack of
self-worth that leads to excessive con-
cern over physical appearance. Normal
dieting may develop into starvation.
In the early stages, sufferers may be
overactive and exercise excessively.
They are obsessed with food, and often
make complicated meals for their fami-
lies, but are reluctant to eat socially and
manage to avoid eating the meals
themselves. As weight loss continues,
they become tired and weak, the skin
becomes dry, lanugo hair (fine, downy
hair) grows on the body, and normal
hair becomes thinner. Starvation leads
to amenorrhoea  in many women. Some
anorexics sometimes make themselves
vomit or take  laxative drugs or  diuretic
drugs to promote weight loss (see
bulimia). Chemical imbalances as a
result of starvation with or without
vomiting can cause potentially fatal car-
diac arrhythmias.
Hospital treatment is often necessary
and is usually based on a closely con-
trolled feeding programme, combined
with  psychotherapy or  family therapy.
For some people,  antidepressantdrugs
may be helpful. Many sufferers relapse
after treatment, and long-term psycho-
therapy is required.
anorgasmia Inability to achieve orgasm
(see orgasm, lack of).
anosmia Loss of the sense of smell. 
anoxia A complete absence of oxygen
in a body tissue. Anoxia causes disrup-
tion of cell metabolism and cell death
unless corrected within a few minutes.
Anoxia occurs during cardiopulmonary
arrest or asphyxiation and will cause
permanent organ damage or even death
if not corrected. (See also hypoxia.)
antacid drugs Drugs taken to relieve
thesymptoms of  indigestion,  heartburn,
oesophagitis, acid reflux, and peptic ulcer.
Antacids usually contain compounds of
magnesium or aluminium, which neutra-
lize stomach acid. Some also contain
alginates, which protect the lining of
the oesophagus from stomach acid, or
dimeticone, an antifoaming agent, which
helps to relieve flatulence.
Aluminium may cause constipation
and magnesium may cause diarrhoea;
but these effects may be avoided if a
preparation contains both ingredients.
Antacids interfere with the absorption
of many drugs and should not be taken
at the same time as other drugs.
antagonist Having an opposing effect.
For example, antagonist drugs counter-
act the effects of naturally occurring
chemicals in the body. (see also agonist.)
antenatal care The care of a pregnant
woman and her unborn baby through-
out a pregnancy. Such care involves
regular visits to a doctor or midwife,
who performs abdominal examinations,
blood and urine tests, and monitoring
of blood pressure and fetal growth to
detect disease or potential problems.
Ultrasound scanning is carried out to
identify abnormalities in the fetus. Chori-
onic villus sampling or  amniocentesis
may be performed if the baby is thought
to be at increased risk of a chromosomal
abnormality or a  genetic disorder. The
woman is also advised on general asp-
ects of pregnancy, such as diet, exercise,
techniques to help her with childbirth.
(See also childbirth, natural.)
antepartum haemorrhage Bleeding
from the vagina after the 28th week of
pregnancy. Antepartum haemorrhage is
most commonly due to a problem with
the placenta, such as  placenta praevia
or  placental abruption. Bleeding can
also be caused by  cervical erosion or
other disorders of the cervix or vagina. 
Admission to hospital is necessary for
investigation and treatment. Ultrasound
scanning is used to diagnose problems
with the placenta. If the bleeding is
severe, the woman is given a  blood
transfusion, and the baby is delivered
immediately by caesarean section.
anterior Relating to the front of the
body. In human  anatomy, the term is
synonymous with ventral.
anthelmintic drugs A group of drugs
that are used to eradicate worm infes-
tations. Possible side effects include
nausea, abdominal pain, rash, head-
ache, and dizziness.
anthracosis An outdated term for coal
worker＊s pneumoconiosis. Anthracosis is
a lung disease caused by the inhalation
of large amounts of coal dust over a
period of many years.
ANORGASMIA ANTHRACOSIS
A39
anthrax A serious bacterial infection of
livestock that occasionally spreads to
humans. In humans, the most common
form of the infection is cutaneous
anthrax, which affects the skin. Another
form, pulmonary anthrax, affects the
lungs. Anthrax is caused by  BACILLUS
ANTHRACIS. This microorganism produ-
ces spores that can remain dormant for
years in soil and animal products and
are capable of reactivation. Animals
become infected by grazing on contamin-
ated land. People may become infected
via a scratch or sore if they handle
materials from infected animals. Pulm-
onary anthrax occurs as a result of
inhaling spores from animal fibres. 
In cutaneous anthrax, a raised, itchy,
area develops at the site of entry of the
spores, progressing to a large blister
and finally a black scab, with swelling of
the surrounding tissues. This is treat-
able with  penicillin in its early stages.
Without treatment, the infection may
spread to lymph nodes and the blood-
stream, and may be fatal. Pulmonary
anthrax causes severe breathing diffi-
culty and is fatal in most cases.
antiallergy drugs Drugs that are used
to treat or prevent allergic reactions
(see  allergy). There are several groups,
including corticosteroids, antihistamines,
leukotriene receptor antagonists, and
sodium cromoglicate.
antianxiety drugs A group of drugs
used to relieve the symptoms of anxiety.
Benzodiazepine drugs and  beta-blocker
drugs are the 2 main types, although
antidepressant drugs may occasionally
be used. Benzodiazepine drugs promote
mental and physical relaxation; they
can also be used to treat insomnia, but
their use for this purpose is avoided be-
cause they are addictive. Beta-blockers
reduce only the physical symptoms of
anxiety, such as shaking and palpi-
tations, and are not addictive.
antiarrhythmic drugs A group of drugs
used to prevent or treat  arrhythmia
(irregular heartbeat). This group includes
those given intravenously in hospital to
treat arrhythmias that are causing symp-
toms such as breathlessness or chest
pain. Adenosine and bretyllium are
examples of drugs used only in hospital.
A number of drugs are used to prevent
intermittent arrhythmias or to slow the
rate if an arrhythmia is persistent. These
include amiodarone, beta-blockerdrugs,
calcium channel blockers, digitalis drugs,
disopyramide, flecainide, lidocaine (ligno-
caine), mexiletine, and  procainamide.
Side effects are common and often
include nausea and rash. Some antiar-
rhythmics can result in tiredness or
breathlessness because they reduce the
heart＊s pumping ability.
antibacterial drugs A group of drugs
used to treat infections caused by bac-
teria. The term antibacterial was once
used to describe antibiotics that had
been produced synthetically rather than
naturally. The terms are now used inter-
changeably. (See also antibiotic drugs.)
antibiotic drugs A group of drugs used
to treat infections caused by  bacteria
and to prevent bacterial infection in
cases of immune system impairment.
Most of the commonly used antibiotic
drugs belong to one of the following
classes:  penicillins,  quinolones,  amino-
glycosides,  cephalosporins,  macrolides,
and  tetracyclines. Some antibiotics are
effective against only certain types of
bacteria; others, which are known as
broad-spectrum antibiotics, are effec-
tive against a wide range.
Some bacteria develop resistance to a
previously effective antibiotic drug. This
is most likely to occur during long-term
treatment. Some alternative antibiotics
are available to treat bacteria that have
become resistant to the more com-
monly prescribed drugs.
Most antibiotic drugs can cause nau-
sea, diarrhoea, or a rash. Antibiotics
may disturb the normal balance be-
tween certain types of bacteria and
fungi in the body, leading to prolifera-
tion of the fungi that cause  candidiasis
(thrush). Some people experience a
severe allergic reaction to the drugs,
resulting in facial swelling, itching, or
breathing difficulty.
antibody A protein that is made by cer-
tain lymphocytes (white blood cells) to
neutralize an  antigen (foreign protein)
in the body. Bacteria, viruses, and other
microorganisms contain many antigens;
antibodies that are formed against
ANTIBODY ANTHRAX
A40
these antigens help the body to neu-
tralize or destroy the invading micro-
organisms. Antibodies may be formed
in response to  vaccines, thereby giving
immunity. Antibodies are also known as
immunoglobulins.
Inappropriate or excessive formation
of antibodies may lead to illness, as in
an  allergy. Antibodies against antigens
in organ transplants may result in rej-
ection of the transplanted organ. In
some disorders, antibodies are formed
against the body＊s own tissues, result-
ing in an autoimmune disorder.
antibody, monoclonal An artificially
produced antibody that neutralizes only
one specific antigen (foreign protein).
Monoclonal antibodies are produced
in a laboratory by stimulating the growth
of a large number of antibody-producing
cells that are genetically identical. In
effect, this process enables antibodies
to be tailor-made so that they will react
with a particular antigen.
Monoclonal antibodies are used in
the study of human cells, hormones,
microorganisms, and in the develop-
ment of vaccines. They are also being
used in the diagnosis and treatment of
some forms of cancer. 
anticancer drugs Drugs that are used
to treat many forms of cancer. They are
particularly useful in the treatment of
lymphomas,  leukaemias,  breast cancer,
cancer of the testis (see testis, cancerof),
and prostate cancer and are often used
together with surgery or radiotherapy. 
Most anticancer drugs are cytotoxic
(kill or damage rapidly dividing cells),
but some act by slowing the growth of
hormone-sensitive tumours. Anticancer
drugs are often prescribed in combina-
tion to maximize their effects.
Treatment with cytotoxic drugs is often
given by injection in short courses
repeated at intervals. Some drugs cause
nausea and vomiting and may result in
hair loss and increased susceptibility to
infection. Others, such as tamoxifen,
which is used for breast cancer, are
given continuously by mouth for months
or years and cause few side effects.
anticholinergic drugs A group of
drugs that block the effects of  acetyl-
choline, a chemical released from nerve
endings in the parasympathetic  auto-
nomic nervous system. Acetylcholine
stimulates muscle contraction, increases
secretions in the mouth and lungs, and
slows the heartbeat.
Anticholinergic drugs are used in the
treatment of  irritable bowel syndrome,
urinary incontinence, Parkinson＊s disease,
asthma, and  bradycardia (abnormally
slow heartbeat). They are also used to
dilate the pupil before eye examination
or surgery. Anticholinergic drugs are
used as a premedication before general
anaesthesia and to treat motion sickness.
They may cause dry mouth, blurred
vision, urinary retention, and confusion.
anticoagulant drugs A group of drugs
used to treat and prevent abnormal
blood clotting, to treat  thrombosis, and
to prevent and treat stroke and transient
ischaemic attack. Anticoagulant drugs
are also given to prevent abnormal
blood clotting after major surgery (esp-
ecially heart-valve replacement) or
during haemodialysis (see dialysis). The
most common anticoagulants are  hep-
arin and the newer heparin-derived
drugs, such as tinzaparin, all of which
have to be given by injection, and warf-
arin, which is taken orally.
Excessive doses of anticoagulant drugs
increase the risk of unwanted bleeding,
and regular monitoring is needed.
anticonvulsant drugs A group of drugs
used to treat or prevent seizures. They
are used mainly in the treatment of epi-
lepsy but are also given to prevent
seizures following serious head injury or
some types of brain surgery. They may
be needed to control seizures in children
with a high fever (see convulsions, febrile). 
Anticonvulsants may produce various
side effects, including impaired memory,
reduced concentration, poor coordina-
tion, and fatigue. If the side effects are
severe, they can often be minimized by
use of an alternative anticonvulsant.
antidepressant drugs Drugs used in
the treatment of depression .Most of the
commonly used antidepressant drugs
belong to one of the following groups:
tricyclic drugs,  selective serotonin reup-
take inhibitors (SSRIs), and monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). These drugs
are usually successful at relieving the
ANTIBODY, MONOCLONALANTIDEPRESSANT DRUGS
A41
symptoms of depression but often take
2每3 weeks before benefit is felt. Treat-
ment usually lasts for at least 6 months,
and the dosage is reduced gradually
before being stopped altogether. 
Tricyclics may cause drowsiness, dry
mouth, constipation, blurred vision, uri-
nary difficulty, and irregular heartbeat.
SSRIs may cause nausea, indigestion,
andloss of appetite, or allergic reactions
but are less dangerous in overdose than
other antidepressants. MAOIs may inter-
act with foods containing tyramine (for
example, cheese) and other drugs to
cause a dangerous rise in blood pressure,
although one MAOI, moclobemide, is less
likely to cause problems. Antidepressants
are not addictive, but abrupt withdrawal
of some types can result in physical
symptoms and should be avoided.
antidiabetic drugs A group of drugs
used to treat diabetes mellitus, in which
a lack of  insulin, or resistance to its
actions, results in raised blood glucose
levels. A wide range of antidiabetics are
used to keep the blood glucose level as
close to normal as possible, and conse-
quently reduce the risk of complications
such as vascular (blood vessel) disease.
Antidiabetic drugs include insulin,
which must be administered by injec-
tion, and oral  hypoglycaemics such as
glibenclamide and metformin. Acarbose
and  guar gum reduce or slow absorp-
tion of carbohydrate from the intestines
after meals. Repaglinide stimulates insu-
linrelease from the pancreas for a short
time and may be taken directly before
meals. Rosiglitazone reduces resistance
to the effects of insulin in the tissues
and may be used together with other
hypoglycaemics.
antidiarrhoeal drugs Drugs used to
reduce or stop diarrhoea and to help
regulate bowel action in people with a
colostomy or  ileostomy. In most acute
cases of diarrhoea, the only treatment
recommended is oral rehydration therapy.
Antidiarrhoeal drugs include adsorb-
ents, bulk-forming agents such as
kaolin, and antimotility drugs (includ-
ing the opioid drugs,  morphine and
codeine, and loperamide), which slow
movement through the intestine. None
of these drugs are suitable for children.
antidiuretic hormone See ADH. 
antidote A substance that neutralizes
or counteracts the effects of a poison.
anti-D(Rh0) immunoglobulin An anti-
serum that contains antibodies against
Rhesus (Rh) D factor (a substance pre-
sent on the red blood cells of people
with Rh-positive blood). Anti-D(Rh0)
immunoglobulin is given routinely at
intervals during normal pregnancy and
at delivery. An additional dose is also
given after an amniocentesis, miscar-
riage, or any event in which the baby＊s
blood may enter the mother＊s circula-
tion. The injected antibodies prevent
the woman from forming her own anti-
bodies against Rh-positive blood, which
might adversely affect a subsequent
pregnancy. (See also haemolytic disease
of the newborn; Rhesus incompatibility.) 
antiemetic drugs A group of drugs
used to treat  nausea and  vomiting.
Antihistamine drugs and  anticholinergic
drugs reduce vomiting in  motion sick-
ness, vertigo, and M谷ni豕re＊s disease. The
most powerful antiemetics are used to
control nausea and vomiting associated
with  radiotherapy or anticancer drugs.
These drugs include  serotonin antago-
nists such as ondansetron and nabilone.
Antiemetics are not normally used in
the treatment of food poisoning be-
cause the body needs to rid itself of
harmful substances. Only certain anti-
emetics can be used to treat vomiting
in early pregnancy because damage to
the developing fetus may occur. Many
antiemetics cause drowsiness.
antifreeze poisoning Most antifreeze
in the UK contains ethylene glycol,
which is poisonous. Drinking antifreeze
initially produces effects similar to alco-
hol intoxication, but vomiting, stupor,
seizures, and coma may follow; acute
kidney failure may occur within 24每36
hours. Antifreeze poisoning requires
immediate medical attention.
antifungal drugs A group of drugs
used to treat infections caused by fungi.
Antifungal drugs are commonly used to
treat different types of tinea, including
athlete＊s foot and scalp ringworm. They
are also used for  candidiasis  (thrush)
and rare fungal infections, such as cryp-
tococcosis, that affect internal organs.
ANTIFUNGAL DRUGS ANTIDIABETIC DRUGS
A42
Antifungal preparations are available in
various forms including tablets, injec-
tion, creams, and pessaries. Prolonged
treatment of serious fungal infections
can result in side effects that include
liver or kidney damage.
antigen A substance that can trigger an
immune response, resulting in produc-
tion of an antibody as part of the body＊s
defence against infection and disease.
Many antigens are foreign proteins (not
found naturally in the body) such as
parts of microorganisms and toxins or
tissues from another person that have
been used in organ transplants. Some-
times, harmless substances (pollen, for
example) are misidentified by the
immune system as potentially harmful
antigens, which results in an allergic
response (see allergy).
antihistamine drugs A group of drugs
that block the effects of  histamine, a
chemical released in allergic reactions
(see  allergy). Antihistamines are used
to treat rashes such as urticaria and to
relieve sneezing and a runny nose in
allergic  rhinitis. They are also some-
times included in  cough remedies and
cold remedies and are used as  antiem-
etic drugs. Antihistamines are usually
taken by mouth but may be given by
injection for  anaphylactic shock. Many
antihistamines cause drowsiness, but
newer drugs have little sedative effect.
Other possible side effects include loss
of appetite, nausea, dry mouth, blurred
vision, and difficulty in passing urine. 
antihypertensive drugs A group of
drugs used in the treatment of  hyper-
tension to prevent complications such
as  stroke,  myocardial infarction,  heart
failure, and kidney damage. There are
several types, including  angiotensin II
antagonists,  beta-blocker drugs, ACE
inhibitor drugs,  calcium channel block-
ers,  alpha-blocker drugs,  vasodilator
drugs, and  diuretic drugs. Side effects
depend on the type of antihypertensive
drugs used, but all can cause dizziness
if the blood pressure falls excessively.
anti-inflammatory drugs Drugs that
reduce  inflammation. The main groups
of these drugs are  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs  and  corticosteroid
drugs. (See also analgesic drugs.)
antimalarial drugs Drugs used to treat
malaria. One antimalarial drug,  chloro-
quine, is also used to treat arthritis.
antioxidant A type of chemical that
neutralizes potentially damaging oxidiz-
ing molecules known as  free radicals.
Some antioxidants occur naturally in
the body; others (vitamin C, vitamin E,
and beta-carotene, for example) are
obtained through food intake or from
dietary supplements.
antiperspirant A substance applied to
the skin in the form of a lotion, cream,
or spray to reduce sweating. High con-
centrations are sometimes used to treat
hyperhidrosis (abnormally heavy sweat-
ing). Antiperspirants may cause skin
irritation, particularly if they are used
on broken skin. (See also deodorants.)
antiplatelet drugs Drugs that reduce
the tendency of  platelets to stick to-
gether to form blood clots when blood
flow in the arteries is disrupted. This
action reduces the risk of  thrombo-
embolism, which can cause potentially
fatal disorders such as a  myocardial
infarction or  stroke. Aspirin and dipyri-
damole are commonly used antiplatelet
drugs. Others, such as ticlopidine, are
used specifically to protect against clots
forming in the coronary arteries of peo-
ple with angina.
antipruritic drugs Drugs that are used
to relieve persistent itching (pruritus).
Antipruritics may be applied as creams
and  emollients and may contain  corti-
costeroid drugs,  antihistamine drugs,or
localanaesthetics. Oral antihistamines
may also be used to relieve itching.
antipsychotic drugs A group of drugs
used to treat  psychoses (mental disor-
ders involving loss of contact with
reality), particularly  schizophrenia and
mania in bipolar disorder (see  manic每
depressive illness). Antipsychotic drugs
may also be used to sedate people who
have other mental disorders (such as
dementia) and who are very agitated or
aggressive. Antipsychotics include phe-
nothiazine drugs, butyrophenones, such
as  haloperidol, and several new drugs
including risperidone, which is used to
treat the symptoms of mania.
Antipsychotics can cause drowsiness,
lethargy,  dyskinesia, and  parkinsonism.
ANTIGEN ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS
A43
Other possible side effects include dry
mouth, blurred vision, and difficulty in
passing urine. However, newer drugs
may have fewer side effects when used
in the long term.
antipyretic drugs Drugs that reduce
fever. Examples of antipyretic drugs
include  paracetamol,  aspirin, and other
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
antiretroviral drugs Drugs that are
used to slow or halt the spread of 
viruses in people with  HIV infection 
and  AIDS. There are 3 main groups:
reverse transcriptase inhibitors, pro-
tease inhibitors, and non-nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Drugs
from different groups are often used in
combination. Antiretroviral drugs can
have a range of side effects, including
nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, tiredness,
and a range of effects on blood chem-
istry, particularly involving fats.
antirheumatic drugs A group of drugs
used to treat  rheumatoid arthritis and
types of arthritis that are caused by
other  autoimmune disorders such as
systemic lupus erythematosus. Antirheu-
matic drugs affect the disease process
and may limit joint damage, unlike non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which
only relieve pain and stiffness. The
main antirheumatic drugs are  cortico-
steroid drugs, immunosuppressant drugs,
chloroquine, gold, penicillamine, and sul-
fasalazine. Many of these drugs can have
serious side effects, and treatment must
be under specialist supervision.
antiseptics Chemicals applied to the
skin in order to destroy bacteria and
other microorganisms, thereby prevent-
ing infection. Common antiseptics are
chlorhexidine,  cetrimide,  hexachloroph-
ene, and compounds containing  iodine.
(See also disinfectants; aseptic technique.)
antiserum A preparation containing anti-
bodies (also known as immunoglobulins)
that combine with specific antigens (for-
eign proteins), usually components of
microorganisms, leading to deactivation
or destruction of the microorganisms.
Antiserum is usually used, along with
immunization, as an emergency treat-
ment when someone has been exposed
to a dangerous infection such as rabies
and has not previously been immunized.
antisocial personality disorder Imp-
ulsive, destructive behaviour that often
disregards the feelings and rights of
others. People who have an antisocial
personality lack a sense of guilt and
cannot tolerate frustration. They may
have problems with relationships and
are frequently in trouble with the law.
Behaviour therapy, and various forms of
psychotherapy, may help to improve
integration. In general, the effects of
this disorder decrease with age.
antispasmodic drugs A group of drugs
that relax spasm in smooth muscle in
the wall of the intestine or bladder.
These drugs are used to treat  irritable
bowel syndrome and  irritable bladder.
Possible side effects include dry mouth,
blurred vision, and difficulty in passing
urine. (See also anticholinergic drugs.)
antithyroid drugs Drugs used to treat
hyperthyroidism, in which the thyroid
gland is overactive. They may be used
as the sole treatment or before thyroid
surgery.  Carbimazole and  propylthiour-
acil interfere with the production of
thyroid hormone by the gland.
antitoxin Any of a variety of commer-
cially prepared substances containing
antibodies that can combine with and
neutralize the effect of a specific  toxin
released into the bloodstream by par-
ticular bacteria. Antitoxins are usually
given by injection into a muscle. Occa-
sionally, an antitoxin may cause an
allergic reaction (see allergy).
antitussive drugs Drugs that suppress
or relieve a cough (see cough remedies).
antivenom A specific treatment for bites
or stings inflicted by venomous animals
such as snakes, spiders, and scorpions.
Antivenoms are given by intravenous in-
jection and may cause allergic reactions.
antiviraldrugs Drugs used in the 
treatment of infection by  viruses. No
drugs have been developed that can
eradicate viruses, and at present immu-
nization is the most effective way of
preventing serious viral infections.
However, antiviral drugs can reduce
the severity of some viral infections
(most notably  herpes,  influenza, viral
hepatitis, and  cytomegalovirus  infec-
tions), particularly in people who have
reduced immunity. Advances have also
ANTIVIRAL DRUGS ANTIPYRETIC DRUGS
A44
been made in the treatment of HIV
infection (see antiretroviral drugs).
antral irrigation Irrigation of the max-
illary antrum, one of the nasal sinuses.
More commonly known as sinus wash-
out, this procedure is used to diagnose
and treat persistent sinusitis. Antral irri-
gation is performed less often since the
introduction of nasal endoscopy.
anuria Complete cessation of urine out-
put. Anuria may be caused by a severe
malfunction of the kidneys, but a more
common cause is a complete blockage
of urine flow, due to enlargement of the
prostate gland (see prostate, enlarged),
a bladder tumour, or a stone (see calcu-
lus, urinary tract). Failure of the kidneys
to produce urine may be due to oxygen
depletion as a result of reduced blood
flow through the kidneys, as occurs in
shock, or to severe kidney damage
caused by a disease such as  glomer-
ulonephritis. Anuria requires urgent
investigation. Treatment of the cause
may restore urine production, but any
delay can result in permanent kidney
damage, leading to uraemia.
anus The end of the alimentary tract
through which faeces are expelled from
the body. The orifice at the end of the
anal canal is open only during defaeca-
tion; at other times it is kept closed by
the muscles of the anal sphincter. (See
also digestive system.)
anus, cancer of A rare cancer of the
skin of the anus. Possible early signs
are development of swelling or an ulcer
at the anus accompanied by bleeding
and discomfort. Treatment is by surgical
removal and/or radiotherapy. 
anus, disorders of Most anal disor-
ders affect adults and are minor, but
they may cause discomfort. Rarely, the
anus may fail to develop normally and
surgical treatment is needed (see anus,
imperforate). In  anal stenosis, the anus
is too narrow to allow the passage of
faeces.  Anal fissures  originate from
tears in the lining of the anus, usually
as a result of straining to pass faeces.
Cancer of the skin around the anus is
rare (see anus, cancer of). Haemorrhoids
are enlarged blood vessels under the
anal lining. An  anal fistula is an abnor-
mal channel connecting the anal canal
with the skin surrounding the anus.
Itching of the anus is common and may
be due to haemorrhoids or other disor-
ders such as threadworm infestation.
anus, imperforate A rare  congenital
abnormality in which the anal opening
is missing or covered over. The severity
of the condition varies from complete
absence of the anal canal to only a layer
of skin covering the anal opening.
Treatment involves surgery. A  colos-
tomy may be needed initially before
definitive surgery to construct an anus.
anxiety An unpleasant emotional state
ranging from mild unease to intense
fear. Various physical symptoms are
associated with anxiety; the most com-
mon include palpitations, chest pains, a
feeling of tightness in the chest, and 
a tendency to overbreathe (see  hyper-
ventilation). Muscle tension leads to
headaches and back pains. Gastroin-
testinal symptoms include dry mouth,
bloating, diarrhoea, nausea, and diffi-
culty in swallowing. Other symptoms
include sweating, blushing, pallor, light-
headedness, and a frequent need to
urinate or defaecate. Anxiety is a nor-
mal response to stressful situations and
prepares the mind and body to respond
effectively. However, anxiety that occurs
without reason may be a symptom of an
anxiety disorder or another psychologi-
cal disorder such as depression.
People suffering from anxiety may be
helped by counselling or psychotherapy.
If there is an underlying disorder such
as depression, treatment with  antianx-
iety drugs can help. Antianxiety drugs
are used for short-term control of symp-
toms but are avoided for long-term
treatment because they are addictive.
anxiety disorders A group of mental
illnesses, including several specific syn-
dromes, in which symptoms of  anxiety
are the main feature. These disorders are
common and mainly affect young adults.
In  generalized anxiety disorder, there
is persistent tension and apprehension
that has no specific focus or cause,
together with physical or psychological
symptoms that disrupt normal activity.
Panic disorders are characterized by
sudden attacks of extreme, unreason-
able anxiety. Phobias are irrational fears,
ANTRAL IRRIGATION ANXIETY DISORDERS
A45
such as the fear of open spaces or spi-
ders, that lead to avoidance of certain
situations or objects.
Counselling, psychotherapy, and group
or individual cognitive每behaviour ther-
apy are used to treat anxiety disorders.
Antianxiety drugs (especially  benzodi-
azepine drugs) may be used for short-
term treatment but are addictive.
anxiolytics See antianxiety drugs.
aorta The body＊s main  artery, which
supplies oxygenated blood to all other
parts. The aorta arises from the left ven-
tricle (the main pumping chamber of
the heart) and arches up over the heart
before descending, behind it, through
the chest cavity. It terminates in the
abdomen by dividing into the 2 com-
mon iliac arteries of the legs. 
The aorta is thick-walled and has a
large diameter in order to cope with the
high pressure and large volume of blood
passing through it. (See also  arteries,
disorders of; circulatory system.)
aortic incompetence Leakage of blood
through the aortic valve (one of the
heart valves), resulting in a backflow of
blood from the aorta into the left ventri-
cle (the heart＊s main pumping chamber).
Failure of the aortic valve to close
properly may be due to a  congenital
abnormality in which the valve has 2
flaps rather than 3. The valve leaflets
can be destroyed by infective endocardi-
tis. Aortic incompetence  is associated
with ankylosing spondylitis, and Marfan＊s
syndrome. Atherosclerosis may damage
the valve, causing a combination of aor-
tic stenosis and incompetence. Aortic
incompetence is also found in untreat-
ed syphilis, which is now rare.
Aortic incompetence may not cause
symptoms and is sometimes found dur-
ing a routine medical examination. The
heart compensates for the backflow of
blood into the left ventricle by working
harder, which may eventually lead to
heart failure; this causes breathing diffi-
culty and oedema (fluid accumulation).
Chest X-ray, ECG, and echocardiogra-
phy may be carried out to diagnose
aortic incompetence. A cardiac catheter
is sometimes used to demonstrate the
degree of incompetence (see  catheter-
ization, cardiac). Heart failure resulting
from aortic incompetence can be treated
with diuretic drugs. Heart-valve surgery
to replace the damaged valve may
eventually be necessary.
aortic stenosis Narrowing of the open-
ing of the aortic valve (one of the heart
valves), causing obstruction of blood flow
into the circulation. This makes the heart
work harder and causes the muscle in
the wall of the left ventricle (the main
pumping chamber) to thicken. Narrowing
of the valve also reduces the amount of
blood flowing into the coronary arteries.
The most common cause of aortic
stenosis is deposition of calcium on the
aortic valve, usually associated with
atherosclerosis. Aortic stenosis may also
be caused by a congenital abnormality. 
Aortic stenosis may not cause symp-
toms. When symptoms do occur, they
AORTIC STENOSIS ANXIOLYTICS
A
Vena cava
AORTA
Heart
Aorta
Descending
aorta
Descending
vena cava
NORMAL AORTASTENOSED AORTA
Cusp
Normal
blood
flow
Abnormal
cusp
Restricted
blood
flow
AORTIC STENOSIS46
include fainting, lack of energy, chest
pain on exertion due to  angina, and
breathing difficulty.
Chest X-ray, ECG, and echocardiogra-
phy may be carried out to diagnose
aortic stenosis. A cardiac catheter can
be used to demonstrate the degree of
stenosis (see  catheterization, cardiac).
Heart-valve surgery may be needed to
widen or replace the damaged valve.
aortitis Inflammation of the  aorta (the
main artery of the body). Aortitis is a
rare condition that occurs in people
with arteritis or untreated syphilis and in
some people with ankylosing spondylitis.
Aortitis may cause part of the aorta to
widen and its walls to become thinner.
This may lead to an aneurysm (balloon-
ing of the artery). Aortitis may damage
the ring around the aortic valve in the
heart, leading to aortic incompetence.
aortography An imaging technique that
enables the aorta (the main artery of the
body) and its branches to be seen clear-
ly on X-ray film following injection of a
contrast medium (a substance that is
opaque to X-rays). Aortography is used
if surgery is needed to treat an  aneu-
rysm (ballooning of the aorta).
aperient A mild laxative drug.
apex  The uppermost surface of a struc-
ture, for example the top, end, or tip of
an organ such as a lung or the heart.
apex beat  A normal hearbeat felt
through the chest wall. As the heart con-
tracts, its tip hits the chest wall and can
be felt between the 5th and 6th ribs on
the left side of the chest. The apex beat
is displaced when the heart is enlarged.
Apgar score A system designed to
assess the condition of a newborn baby.
Five features are scored 1 minute and
again 5 minutes after birth. These are
breathing, heart-rate, colour, muscle
tone, and response to stimulation.
aphakia The absence of the  lens from
the eye. Aphakia may be congenital,
may result from surgery (for example,
cataract surgery), or may be due to a
penetrating injury. Aphakia causes sev-
ere loss of focusing in the affected eye
and requires correction by implanting a
lens or with contact lenses or glasses.
aphasia A complete absence of previ-
ously acquired language skills, caused
by a brain disorder that affects the abil-
ity to speak and write, and/or the ability
to comprehend and read. Related dis-
abilities that may occur in aphasia are
alexia  (word blindness) and  agraphia
(writing difficulty).
Language function in the brain lies in
the dominant cerebral hemisphere (see
cerebrum). Two particular areas in this
hemisphere, Broca＊s and Wernicke＊s
areas, and the pathways connecting the
two, are important in language skills.
Damage to these areas, which most
commonly occurs as a result of stroke
or head injury, can lead to aphasia.
Some recovery from aphasia is usual
following a stroke or head injury,
although the more severe the aphasia,
the less the chances of recovery. Speech
therapy is the main treatment. (See also
dysphasia; speech; speech disorders.)
apheresis A procedure in which blood
is withdrawn from a donor and is re-
infused after one or more selected
components have been separated and
removed. In plasmapheresis, antibodies
that are causing a disease are removed;
and in leukapher-
esis, white blood
cells are removed.
aphonia Complete
loss of the voice,
which may result
from surgery to the
larynx, or it may 
be sudden in onset
and due to emo-
tional stress. (See
also dysphonia.)
aphrodisiac Any
substance that is
AORTITIS APHRODISIAC
A
SIGN
Heart-rate
Breathing
Muscle tone
Response to
stimulation
Colour
SCORE 0
None
None
Limp
None
Pale; blue
SCORE 1
Below 100 beats
per minute
Weak cry; irregular
breathing
Some muscle 
tone
Grimace or
whimpering
Blue extremities
SCORE 2
Over 100 beats 
per minute
Strong cry; regular
breathing
Active 
movement
Cry, sneeze 
or cough
Pink
APGAR SCORE47
thought to stimulate erotic desire and
enhance sexual performance. For cent-
uries, various substances (most notably
oysters and rhinoceros horn) have been
used as aphrodisiacs. In fact, no sub-
stance has a proven aphrodisiac effect.
aphthous ulcer See ulcer, aphthous. 
apicectomy Surgical removal of the tip
of a tooth root. Apicectomy may be per-
formed as part of root-canal treatment.
aplasia Absent or severely reduced
growth and development of any organ
or tissue. For example, in bone marrow
aplasia, the rate of cell division in the
bone marrow is reduced, leading to in-
sufficient blood-cell production (see
anaemia, aplastic). Some birth defects,
such as stunted limbs (see phocomelia),
occur as a result of incomplete tissue
formation during prenatal development.
aplastic anaemia See anaemia, aplastic.
apnoea Cessation of breathing, either
temporarily or for a prolonged period. 
Breathing is an automatic process
controlled by the respiratory centre in
the brainstem. Failure of this centre to
maintain normal breathing is known as
central apnoea. It may occur in babies,
particularly those who are premature,
and can be detected by an apnoea
alarm. Central apnoea can also result
from brainstem damage, for example
following a stroke or head injury.
In obstructive apnoea, breathing is pre-
vented by a blockage in the airway. The
most common type is  sleep apnoea, in
which blockage of the upper airway
occurs repeatedly during sleep.
Deliberate temporary apnoea occurs
in  breath-holding attacks. Another type
of apnoea occurs in Cheyne每Stokes res-
piration, in which cycles of deep, rapid
breathing alternate with episodes of
breathing stoppage.
Treatment of apnoea depends on the
cause. In newborn babies, it resolves as
they mature. In stroke or head injury,
artificial ventilation may be needed
temporarily until recovery occurs.
apocrine gland A gland that dis-
charges cellular material in addition to
the fluid it secretes. The term is usually
applied to the type of sweat glands that
appear in hairy body areas after puberty.
(See also eccrine gland.)
apolipoprotein A group of proteins
that are constituents of lipoproteins, the
carriers of fat in the bloodstream. Apo-
lipoproteins are also involved in the
growth and repair of nerve tissues. 
aponeurosis A wide sheet of tough,
fibrous tissue that acts as a tendon,
attaching a muscle to a bone or a joint. 
apophysis An outgrowth of bone at the
site of attachment of a tendon to bone.
Inflammation may also occur, as in
Osgood每Schlatter disease.
apoplexy An outdated term for a stroke.
apoptosis The natural process of pro-
grammed cell death. Apoptosis occurs
in embryonic development, when the
shaping of body parts is taking place
and continues throughout life in the
constant cycle of death and renewal of
body cells. Failure of apoptosis is impli-
cated in the development of cancers.
apothecary An old term for a pharmacist.
appendicectomy Surgical removal of the
appendix to treat acute appendicitis.
appendicitis Acute inflammation of the
appendix. The cause is usually not
known, but appendicitis is sometimes
caused by obstruction of the appendix
by a lump of faeces. The 1st symptom is
usually vague discomfort around the
navel. Within a few hours, this develops
into severe, more localized pain, whichis
usually most intense in the lower right-
hand side of the abdomen. Symptoms
may differ if the appendix is not in the
most common position. For example, if
the appendix impingeson the  ureter,
the urine may become bloodstained.
The usual treatment for appendicitis 
is  appendicectomy,which is often per-
formed endoscopically(see  minimally
invasive surgery). If the treatment  is
delayed, an inflamed appendix may
burst, releasing its contents into the
abdomen. This leads to peritonitis and,
in some cases, an abscess.
appendix A small, narrow tube that
projects out of the caecum (the 1st part
of the colon) at the lower right-hand
side of the abdomen. It may lie behind
or below the caecum, or in front of or
behind the ileum (part of the small
intestine). The appendix has no known
function, but it contains a large amount
of lymphoid tissue which provides a
APPENDIX APHTHOUS ULCER
A48
defence against local infection. The
position of an individual＊s appendix
partly determines the set of symptoms
produced by acute appendicitis (inflam-
mation of the appendix).
appetite A desire for food; a pleasant
sensation felt in anticipation of eating.
Appetite, which is regulated by 2 parts
of the brain (the hypothalamus and the
cerebral cortex), is learned by enjoying
a variety of foods that smell, taste, and
look good. It combines with hunger to
ensure that the right amount of a wide
range of foods is eaten to stay healthy.
(See also appetite, loss of.)
appetite, loss of Loss of appetite is
usually temporary and due to an emo-
tional upset or minor illness. Persistent
loss of appetite may have a more seri-
ous underlying cause, such as chronic
infection or cancer.
appetite stimulants Various tonics and
remedies traditionally prescribed to
stimulate the appetite. None are proven
to be effective. Some drugs such as cor-
ticosteroids may stimulate the appetite
when used to treat unrelated disorders.
appetite suppressants A group of drugs
that reduce the desire to eat. Appetite
suppressants may be used in the treat-
ment of severe obesity, along with diet
and exercise. Their use is limited to a
maximum of 12 weeks due to  the risk of
serious effects on the blood supply to
the lungs and on heart valves. 
apraxia An inability to carry out pur-
poseful movements despite normal
muscle power and coordination. Aprax-
ia is caused by damage to nerve tracts
in the cerebrum (the main mass of the
brain) that translate the idea for a move-
ment into an actual movement. Damage
to the cerebrum may be caused by a head
injury, infection, stroke, or brain tumour.
There are various forms of apraxia,
each related to damage in different
parts of the brain. A person with ideo-
motor apraxia is unable to carry out a
spoken command to make a particular
movement, but at other times can make
the same movement unconsciously. In
sensory apraxia, a person may not be
able to use an object due to loss of abil-
ity to recognize its purpose. 
APUD cell tumour A growth composed
of cells that produce various hormones.
These cells, amine precursor uptake
and decarboxylation (APUD) cells, occur
in different parts of the body. Some tu-
mours of the thyroid gland, pancreas,
and lungs are APUD cell tumours, as are
a carcinoid tumour (see  carcinoidsyn-
drome) and phaeochromocytoma (a type
of adrenal tumour).
aqueous cream An emollient prepara-
tion that is commonly used to treat 
dry, scaly, or itchy skin in conditions
such as eczema.
aqueous humour A watery fluid that
fills the front chamber of the  eye,
behind the cornea. 
arachidonic acid One of the fatty acids
in the body that are essential for growth.
arachis oil Peanut oil, mostly used in
enemas, to soften faeces and make
bowel movements easier. It may also be
applied to the scalp, followed by sham-
pooing, in the treatment of cradle cap.
arachnodactyly Long, thin, spider-like
fingers and toes that sometimes occur
spontaneously but are characteristic of
Marfan＊s syndrome, an inherited con-
nective tissue disease.
arachnoiditis A rare condition that is
characterized by chronic inflammation
and thickening of the arachnoid mater,
which is the middle of the 3 meninges
(the membranes that cover the brain
and spinal cord).
arachnoid mater The middle of the 3
layers of membrane (meninges) that
cover the brain. 
arbovirus Any of the many viruses trans-
mitted by a member of the arthropod
group of animals, including insects,
APPETITE ARBOVIRUS
A
Colon
Ileum
APPENDIX
Appendix
Rectum
Caecum49
mites, and ticks. (See also insects and dis-
ease; mites and disease; ticks and disease).
ARC An abbreviation for  AIDS-related
complex. (See also AIDS.)
arcus senilis A grey-white ring near the
edge of the  cornea overlying the iris
(the coloured part of the eye). Arcus
senilis is caused by degeneration of
fatty material in the cornea and devel-
ops gradually during adult life. The ring
does not affect eyesight. Development
of the condition in early adult life may
be associated with an abnormality of
fats in the blood (see hyperlipidaemia). 
areola The pigmented circular area sur-
rounding the  nipple. The term is also
used to describe an inflamed area
around a pimple (see pustule).
aromatherapy A form of  complemen-
tary medicine that uses aromatic oils
extracted from plants. The oil is applied
in small quantities through massage; or
it is inhaled, incorporated into creams
or lotions, or, very occasionally, taken
internally. There is no conclusive scien-
tific evidence of the benefits.
arousal The awakening of a person from
unconsciousness or semiconsciousness.
The term is also used to describe any
state of heightened awareness, such as
that caused by sexual stimulation or
fear. Arousal is regulated by the reticu-
lar formation in the brainstem.
arrhenoblastoma A rare tumour of the
ovary that occurs in young women. The
tumour is noncancerous but secretes
androgen hormones (male sex hormones)
that cause virilization (the development
of male characteristics). Treatment is by
surgical removal of the affected ovary.
arrhythmia, cardiac An abnormality
of the rhythm or rate of the  heartbeat.
Arrhythmias, which are caused by a dis-
turbance in the electrical impulses in
the  heart, can be divided into 2 main
groups: tachycardias, in which the rate
is faster than normal, and bradycardias,
in which the rate is slower.
In sinus tachycardia, the rate is raised,
the rhythm is regular, and the beat
originates in the sinoatrial node (see
pacemaker).  Supraventricular tachycar-
dia is faster and the rhythm is regular. It
may be caused by an abnormal electri-
cal pathway that allows an impulse to
circulate continuously in the heart and
take over from the sinoatrial node.
Rapid, irregular beats that originate in
the ventricles are called  ventricular
tachycardia. In  atrial flutter, the atria
(see  atrium) beat regularly and very
rapidly, but not every impulse reaches
the ventricles, which beat at a slower
rate. Uncoordinated, fast beating of the
atria is called atrial fibrillation and pro-
duces totally irregular ventricular beats.
Ventricular fibrillation  is a form of  car-
diac arrest in which the ventricles twitch
very rapidly in a disorganized manner.
Sinus bradycardia is a slow, regular
beat. In  heart block, the conduction 
of electrical impulses through the 
heart muscle is partially or completely
blocked, leading to a slow, irregular
heartbeat. Periods of bradycardia may
alternate with periods of tachycardia
due to a fault in impulse generation
(see sick sinus syndrome).
A common cause of arrhythmia is
coronary artery disease, particularly
after myocardial infarction. Some tachy-
cardias are due to a congenital defect in
the heart's conducting system. Caffeine
can cause tachycardia in some people.
Amitriptyline and some other antidepres-
sant drugs can cause serious arrhythmias
if they are taken in high doses. 
An arrhythmia may be felt as palpita-
tions, but in some cases arrhythmias
ARRHYTHMIA, CARDIAC ARC
A
ARRHYTHMIA, CARDIAC
Sinoatrial node (pacemaker)
Electrical pathway
to left atrium
Atrioventricular
node
Ventricles
Normal
electrical
pathway
Abnormal
electrical
pathway
SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA
Atria50
can cause fainting, dizziness, chest
pain, and breathlessness, which may be
the 1st symptoms. 
Arrhythmias are diagnosed by an ECG.
If they are intermittent, a continuous
recording may need to be made using
an ambulatory ECG.
Treatments for arrhythmias include anti-
arrhythmic drugs, which prevent or slow
tachycardias. With an arrhythmia that
has developed suddenly, it may be pos-
sible to restore normal heart rhythm by
using electric shock to the heart (see
defibrillation). Abnormal conduction path-
ways in the heart can be treated using
radio frequency ablation during cardiac
catheterization (see catheterization, car-
diac). In some cases, a pacemaker can
be fitted to restore normal heartbeat by
overriding the heart＊s abnormal rhythm.
arsenic A poisonous metallic element
that occurs naturally in its pure form
and in various compounds. Arsenic poi-
soning, which is now rare, used to occur
as a result of continuous exposure to
industrial pesticides. 
arterial reconstructive surgery An
operation to repair arteries that are nar-
rowed, blocked, or weakened. Arterial
reconstructive surgery is most often
performed to repair arteries that have
been narrowed by  atherosclerosis. It is
also used to repair  aneurysms and
arteries damaged as a result of injury.
(See also angioplasty, balloon; coronary
artery bypass; endarterectomy.)
arteries, disorders of Disorders of 
the arteries may take the form of abnor-
mal narrowing (which reduces blood
flow and may cause tissue damage),
complete obstruction (which may cause
tissue death), or abnormal widening
and thinning of an artery wall (which
may cause rupture of the blood vessel).
Atherosclerosis, in which fat deposits
build up on artery walls, is the most
common arterial disease. It can involve
arteries throughout the body, including
the brain (see cerebrovascular disease),
heart (see coronary artery disease), and
legs (see  peripheral vascular disease).
Atherosclerosis is the main type of art-
eriosclerosis, a group of disorders that
cause thickening and loss of elasticity
of artery walls. Hypertension  is another
common cause of thickening and nar-
rowing of arteries, and it increases the
risk of a stroke or kidney failure. Arteritis
is inflammation of artery walls that
causes narrowing and sometimes block-
age.  Aneurysm is ballooning of an
artery wall caused by the pressure of
blood flowing through a weakened area.
Thrombosis occurs when a blood clot
forms in a blood vessel, causing obs-
truction of the blood flow. Blockage of
an artery by a fragment of blood clot or
other material travelling in the circula-
tion is called an  embolism.  Raynaud＊s
disease is a disorder involving intermit-
tent spasm of small arteries in the
hands and feet, usually due to cold. 
arteriography An alternative name for
angiography, an X-ray technique for
imaging arteries.
arteriole A blood vessel that branches
off an artery. Arterioles branch to form
capillaries. They have muscular walls,
and their nerve supply enables them to
be narrowed or widened to meet the
blood-flow needs of tissues they supply.
arteriopathy Any disorder of an artery
(see arteries, disorders of).
arterioplasty Surgical repair of an art-
ery (see arterial reconstructive surgery).
arteriosclerosis A group of disorders
that cause thickening and loss of elas-
ticity of artery walls.  Atherosclerosis is
the most common type , and the 2 terms
are often used synonymously. Other
types are medial arteriosclerosis (in
which muscle and elastic fibres in larger
arteries are replaced by fibrous tissue)
and Monckeberg＊s arteriosclerosis (in
which there are calcium deposits in the
arterial lining). 
arteriovenous fistula An abnormal
communication directly between an art-
ery and a vein. An arteriovenous fistula
may be present at birth or result from
injury. A fistula can also be created
surgically for easy access to the blood-
stream in dialysis. 
arteritis Inflammation of an artery wall,
causing narrowing or complete block-
age of the affected artery, reduced
blood flow, and, in some cases,  throm-
bosis and tissue damage. There are
several types, including  Buerger＊s dis-
ease, an arteritis that affects the limbs,
ARSENIC ARTERITIS
A51
causing pain, numbness, and, in severe
cases,  gangrene.  Polyarteritis nodosa, a
serious autoimmune disorder, can affect
arteries in any part of the body, espe-
cially the heart and kidneys.  Temporal
arteritis affects arteries in the scalp and
may affect the eyes. A rare type of arter-
itis is Takayasu＊s arteritis, which is
thought to be an autoimmune disorder.
This usually affects young women and
involves the arteries that branch from
the aorta into the neck and arms. 
artery A blood vessel that carries blood
away from the  heart. Systemic arteries
carry blood pumped from the left ventri-
cle of the heart to all parts of the body
except the lungs. The largest systemic
artery is the aorta, which emerges from
the left ventricle; other major systemic
arteries branch off from the aorta. The
pulmonary arteries carry blood from the
right ventricle to the lungs. 
Arteries are tubes with thick, elastic,
muscular walls able to withstand the
high pressure of blood flow. The structure
of arteries helps to even out the peaks
and troughs of blood pressure caused
by the heartbeat, so that the blood is
kept flowing at a relatively constant pres-
sure. (See also arteries, disorders of.)
arthralgia Pain in the joints or a single
joint. (See also arthritis; joint.)
arthritis Inflammation of one or more
joints, with pain, swelling, and stiffness.
There are several different types of
arthritis, each having different charac-
teristics. The most common form is
osteoarthritis, which most often involves
the knees, hips, and hands and usually
affects middle-aged and older people.
Cervical osteoarthritis is a form of osteo-
arthritis that affects the joints in the
neck. Rheumatoid arthritis is a damaging
condition that causes inflammation in
the joints and other body tissues such
as the membranous heart covering,
lungs, and eyes. The disorder has dif-
ferent effects in children (see  juvenile
chronic arthritis). Ankylosing spondylitis
is another persistent form of arthritis
that initially affects the spine and the
joints between the base of the spine
and the pelvis. Other tissues, such as the
eyes, may also be affected. Eventually,
the disorder may cause the vertebrae
(bones of the spine) to fuse.  Reactive
arthritis typically develops in suscepti-
ble people following an infection, most
commonly of the genital tract or intes-
tines. Gout and pseudogout are types of
arthritis in which crystals are deposited
in a joint, causing swelling and pain.
Septic arthritis is a relatively rare condi-
tion that can develop when infection
enters a joint either through a wound or
from the bloodstream.
Diagnosis of particular types of arthri-
tis is made from  blood tests and, in
some cases, microscopic examination
of fluid from the affected joint. X-rays or
MRI can indicate the type and extent 
of joint damage.
Physiotherapy and exercises can help
to minimize the effects of arthritis, and
there are specific treatments for some
types, such as antibiotic drugs for septic
arthritis. In severe cases, one or more
joints may need  arthroplasty (replace-
ment with an artificial substitute) or
arthrodesis (fusion of the bones).
arthrodesis A surgical procedure in
which the 2 bones in a diseased joint are
fused to prevent the joint from moving,
which relieves pain. Arthrodesis is perfor-
med if a joint is painful or unstable and
other treatments such as drugs or arthro-
plasty have failed or are inappropriate.
arthrography A diagnostic technique
in which the interior of a damaged joint
is X-rayed after injection of a radiopaque
solution. It is being replaced by  MRI,
ultrasound scanning, and arthroscopy.
arthrogryposis See contracture.
arthropathy Disease of the joints.
arthroplasty Replacement of a joint or
part of a joint by metal or plastic com-
ponents. A hip replacement is one of the
most common operations of this type,
ARTHROPLASTY ARTERY
A
Outer layer
Muscle
layer
Elastic
layer
ARTERY
Inner
lining52
as is  knee-joint replacement. Replace-
ment of other joints, such as the finger
(see  finger-joint replacement), shoulder,
and elbow, is also common. 
arthroscopy Inspection through an en-
doscope (viewing tube) of the interior of
a joint. Arthroscopy is most often used
to diagnose disorders of the knee joint
but can also be used in other joints
such as the shoulder, hip, or wrist. It
allows the surgeon to see the surface of
the bones, the ligaments, the cartilages,
and the synovial membrane. Specimens
can be taken for examination. Some
surgical procedures, such as removal of
damaged cartilage, repair of ligaments,
and shaving of the patella (kneecap),
are usually performed arthroscopically.
artificial insemination A form of as-
sisted conception in which semen is
introduced artificially into the uterus,
instead of by sexual intercourse, with
the aim of inducing pregnancy. 
There are 2 types of artificial insemi-
nation: AIH, artificial insemination with
the semen of the woman＊s male partner;
and AID, insemination with a donor＊s
sperm. AIH is usually used for couples
who are unable to have intercourse, or
if the man has a low sperm count or a
low volume of ejaculate. It is also used
when semen has been stored from a man
prior to treatment (such as chemother-
apy) that has made him sterile. AID is
available to couples if the man is infer-
tile or is a carrier of a genetic disease. It
may also be used by a woman who
wants children but has no male partner. 
Insemination is timed to coincide with
natural ovulation or may be combined
with treatment to stimulate ovulation.
artificial kidney The common name
for the machine used in dialysis.
artificial respiration Forced introduc-
tion of air into the lungs of someone
who has stopped breathing (see respir-
atory arrest) or whose breathing is
inadequate. As an emergency first-aid
measure, artificial respiration can be
given mouth-to-mouth or mouth-to-
nose, which can prevent brain damage
due to oxygen deprivation; a delay in
breathing for more than 6 minutes can
cause death. Cardiac compressions may
also be necessary if poor respiration
has led to cessation of the heartbeat
(see cardiopulmonary resuscitation). Arti-
ficial respiration can be continued by
use of a ventilator (see ventilation).
artificial rupture of membrane See
amniotomy.
artificial sweeteners Synthetic substi-
tutes for sugar that are used by people
on slimming diets and by the food
industry. Saccharin and aspartame are
often recommended in calorie-controlled
diets but are of questionable value
because the appetite compensates for
the lack of calories from sugar, and
other foods are eaten to maintain the
calorie intake. Sorbitol is an artificial
sweetener that is  useful for diabetics,
but it can cause diarrhoea and bloating
when consumed in large quantities.
arytenoid One of 2 pyramid-shaped
cartilages that form part of the larynx.
asbestos-related diseases A variety of
diseases caused by inhalation of asbes-
tos fibres. Asbestos is a fibrous mineral
formerly used as a heat- and fire-resis-
tant insulating material. There are 3
main types of asbestos fibre: white,
which is widely used; blue; and brown,
the most dangerous. The use of all
types is now carefully controlled. 
In asbestosis, widespread fine scarring
occurs in the lungs. The disease causes
breathlessness and a dry cough, even-
tually leading to severe disability and
death. It develops mostly in industrial
workers who have been heavily exposed
to asbestos. The period from initial
exposure to development of the disease
is usually at least 20 years. Diagnosis is
by chest X-ray. Asbestosis increases the
risk of lung cancer. 
Mesothelioma is a cancerous tumour
of the pleura (the membrane surround-
ing the lungs) or the  peritoneum  (the
membrane lining the abdominal cavity).
In the pleura, mesotheliomas cause pain
and breathlessness; in the peritoneum
they cause enlargement of the abdo-
men and intestinal obstruction. The
condition cannot be treated and usually
leads to death within 1 or 2 years. The
average interval between initial exposure
to asbestos and death is 20每30 years.
Mesothelioma affects people who have
worked with blue or brown asbestos. 
ARTHROSCOPYASBESTOS-RELATED DISEASES
A53
In diffuse pleural thickening, the outer
and inner layers of the pleura become
thickened, and excess fluid may accu-
mulate in the cavity between them. This
combination restricts the ability of the
lungs to expand, resulting in shortness
of breath. The condition may develop
even after short exposure to asbestos.
asbestosis See asbestos-related diseases.
ascariasis Infestation with the round-
worm ASCARISLUMBRICOIDES, which lives
in the small intestine of its human host.
Ascariasis is common worldwide, espe-
cially in the tropics. The disease is
spread by ingestion of worm eggs, usu-
ally from food grown in soil that has
been contaminated by human faeces.
Light infestation may cause no symp-
toms, but mild nausea, abdominal pain,
and irregular bowel movements may
occur. A worm may be passed via the
rectum or vomited. A large number of
worms may compete with the host for
food, leading to malnutrition and
anaemia, which in children can retard
growth. Treatment is with  anthelmintic
drugs, such as levamisole, which usually
produce complete recovery.
ascites Excess fluid in the peritoneal
cavity, the space between the 2- layered
membrane that lines the inside of the
abdominal wall and which covers the
abdominal organs.
Ascites may occur in any condition
that causes generalized  oedema, such
as congestive  heart failure,  nephrotic
syndrome, and  cirrhosis of the liver.
Ascites may occur in  cancer if metas-
tases (secondary growths) from a cancer
elsewhere in the body develop in the
peritoneum. The condition also occurs
if tuberculosis affects the abdomen.
Ascites causes abdominal swelling
and discomfort. It may cause breathing
difficulty due to pressure on the diaph-
ragm. The underlying cause is treated if
possible.  Diuretic drugs, particularly
spironolactone, are often used to treat
ascites associated with cirrhosis. 
ascorbic acid The chemical name for
vitamin C.
ASD See atrial septal defect.
aseptic technique Creation of a germ-
free environment to protect a patient
from infection. Aseptic technique is
used during surgery and when caring for
people suffering from diseases, such as
leukaemia, in which the  immune system
is suppressed. All people who come in
contact with the patient must scrub their
hands and wear pre-sterilized gowns
and disposable gloves and masks. Sur-
gical instruments are sterilized in an
autoclave. The patient＊s skin is cleaned
with  antiseptic  solutions of  iodine or
hexachlorophene. A special ventilation
system in the operating theatre purifies
the air. (See also isolation.)
aspartame An  artificial sweetener used
in some foods and drugs.
Asperger＊s syndrome A rare develop-
mental disorder that is usually first
recognized in childhood because of dif-
ficulties with social interactions, stilted
speech, and very specialized interests.
Intelligence is normal or high. Asperg-
er＊s syndrome is considered to be an
autistic spectrum disorder  and is also
known as pervasive developmental dis-
order. Special educational support may
be needed, often within mainstream
education. The condition is lifelong.
aspergillosis An infection caused by
inhalation of spores of aspergillus, a
fungus that grows in decaying vegeta-
tion. Aspergillus is harmless to healthy
people but may proliferate in the lungs
of people with  tuberculosis, worsen the
symptoms of asthma, and produce seri-
ous, even fatal, infection in people with
reduced immunity, such as those taking
immunosuppressant drugs. 
aspermia See azoospermia.
asphyxia The medical term for suffoca-
tion. Asphyxia may be caused by the
obstruction of a large airway, usually by
a foreign body (see choking), by insuffi-
cient oxygen in the surrounding air (as
occurs when a closed plastic bag is put
over the head), or by poisoning with a
gas such as carbon monoxide that inter-
feres with the uptake of oxygen into the
blood. First-aid treatment is by artificial
respiration after clearing the airway of
obstruction. Untreated asphyxia leads
to death within a few minutes. 
aspiration The withdrawal of fluid or
cells from the body by suction. The term
also refers to the act of accidentally
inhaling a foreign body, usually food or
ASPIRATION ASBESTOSIS
A54
drink. If consciousness is impaired, for
example by a head injury or excess
alcohol intake, aspiration of the stom-
ach contents is common.
Aspiration  biopsy is the removal of
cells or fluid for examination using a
needle and syringe. The procedure is
commonly used to obtain cells from a
fluid-filled cavity (such as a breast lump
or breast cyst). It is also used to obtain
cells from the bone marrow (see  bone
marrow biopsy), or from internal organs,
when a fine needle is guided into the
site of the biopsy by  CT scanning or
ultrasound scanning. 
aspirin A nonopioid analgesic drug used
to treat disorders such as headache,
menstrual pain, and muscle discomfort.
Aspirin has an anti-inflammatory action
and is particularly useful for joint pain
in arthritis. It reduces fever and is inclu-
ded in some  cold remedies. In small
doses, it reduces the stickiness of plate-
lets (blood particles involved in clotting).
This has led to its use in preventing
thrombosis in people at risk of develop-
ing  stroke or myocardial infarction and
as initial treatment of chest pain that may
be due to myocardial infarction. Aspirin
may also reduce the risk of colon cancer
and slow the progress of dementia.
Aspirin is not usually given to children
because there is a slight risk of Reye＊s
syndrome (a rare brain and liver disorder)
developing.Aspirin may cause irritation
of the stomach lining, resulting in indi-
gestion or nausea. Prolonged use may
cause bleeding from the stomach due
to gastric erosion or peptic ulcer.
assay Analysis or measurement of a
substance to determine its presence or
effects. Biological assays (bioassays)
measure the responses of an animal or
organ to particular substances. They can
be used to assess the effects of a drug
or to measure hormone levels. (See
also immunoassay; radioimmunoassay.)
assisted conception Treatment for  in-
fertility involving techniques that assist
the fertilization and implantation of eggs.
association area One of a number of
areas in the outer layer (cortex) of the
brain that are concerned with higher
levelsof  mental activity. Association
areas interpret information received from
sensory areas and prompt appropriate
responses such as voluntary movement.
astereognosis An inability to recognize
objects by touch when they are placed
in the hand, even though there is no
defect of sensation in the fingers or
difficulty in holding the object. Aster-
eognosis is either left- or right-sided;
tactile recognition is normal on the
other side. If both sides are affected,
the condition is called tactile  agnosia.
Astereognosis and tactile agnosia are
caused by damage to parts of the cere-
brum (main brain mass) involved in
recognition by touch and may occur as
a result of a stroke or head injury.
asthenia An outdated term for loss of
strength and energy (see weakness).
asthenia, neurocirculatory See  car-
diac neurosis.
asthma A lung disease in which there is
intermittent narrowing of the  bronchi
(airways), causing shortness of breath,
wheezing, and cough. The illness often
starts in childhood but can develop at
any age. At least 1 child in 7 suffers
from asthma, and the number affected
has increased dramatically in recent
years. Childhood asthma may be out-
grown in about half of all cases.
During an asthma attack, the muscle
in the walls of the airways contracts,
causing narrowing. The linings of the
airways also become swollen and in-
flamed, producing excess mucus that
can block the smaller airways.
In some people, an allergic response
triggers the airway changes. This aller-
gic type of asthma tends to occur in
ASPIRIN ASTHMA
A
Breast lump
Needle
Fat layer
ASPIRATION OF A BREAST LUMP
Syringe
draws cells
into needle
ASPIRATION
Normal
breast
tissue55
childhood and may develop in associa-
tion with  eczema or certain other
allergic conditions such as hay fever
(see  rhinitis,  allergic). Susceptibility to
these conditions frequently runs in fam-
ilies and may be inherited. 
Some substances, called allergens, are
known to trigger attacks of allergic asth-
ma. They include pollen, house-dust
mites, mould, and  dander and saliva
from furry animals such as cats and
dogs. Rarely, certain foods, such as
milk, eggs, nuts, and wheat, provoke an
allergic asthmatic reaction. Some peo-
ple with asthma are sensitive to aspirin,
and taking it may trigger an attack. 
When asthma starts in adulthood,
there are usually no identifiable allergic
triggers. The 1st attack is sometimes
brought on by a respiratory infection. 
Factors that can provoke attacks in a
person with asthma include cold air,
exercise, smoke, and occasionally emo-
tional factors such as stress and
anxiety. Although industrial pollution
and exhaust emission from motor vehi-
cles do not normally cause asthma,
they do appear to worsen symptoms in
people who already have the disorder.
Pollution in the atmosphere may also
trigger asthma in susceptible people.
In some cases, a substance that is
inhaled regularly in the work environ-
ment can cause a previously healthy
person to develop asthma. This type is
called occupation asthma and is one of
the few occupational lung diseases that
is still increasing in incidence.
There are currently about 200 sub-
stances used in the workplace that are
known to trigger symptoms of asthma,
including glues, resins, latex, and some
chemicals, especially isocyanate chemi-
cals used in spray painting. However,
occupational asthma can be difficult to
diagnose because a person may be reg-
ularly exposed to a particular trigger
substance for weeks, months, or even
years before the symptoms of asthma
begin to appear.
Asthmatic attacks can vary in severity
from mild breathlessness to respiratory
failure. The main symptoms are wheez-
ing,breathlessness, dry cough, and
tightness in the chest. In a severe attack,
breathing becomes increasingly difficult,
resulting in a low level of oxygen in the
blood. This causes cyanosis (bluish dis-
coloration) of the face, particularly the
lips. Untreated, such attacks may be fatal.
There is no cure for asthma, but at-
tacks can be prevented to a large extent
if a particular allergen can be identified.
Treatment involves inhaled  broncho-
dilator drugs (sometimes known as
relievers) to relieve symptoms. When
symptoms occur frequently, or are
severe, inhaled  corticosteroids are also
prescribed. These drugs are used con-
tinuously to prevent attacks by reducing
inflammation in the airways and are
also known as preventers.
Other drug treatments include sodium
cromoglicate and nedocromil sodium,
which are useful in preventing exercise-
induced asthma. A new group of drugs
called  leukotriene receptor antagonists
may reduce the dose of corticosteroid
needed to control the condition. Theo-
phylline or the inhaled anticholinergic
drug  ipratropium may also be used as
ASTHMA
A
NORMAL AIRWAY
AIRWAY DURING ASTHMA ATTACK
Normal air passage
Thin layer
of mucus
Relaxed
muscle
Contracted
muscle
Narrowed
air passage
Excess
mucus 
Mucus-producing cell
ASTHMA
ASTHMA56
bronchodilators. An asthma attack that
has not responded to treatment with a
bronchodilator needs immediate assess-
ment and treatment in hospital.
asthma, cardiac Breathing difficulty in
which  bronchospasm and wheezing are
caused by accumulation of fluid in the
lungs (pulmonary oedema). This is usu-
ally due to reduced pumping efficiency
of the left side of the heart (see  heart
failure) and is not true asthma. Treat-
ment is with diuretic drugs.
astigmatism A condition in which the
front surface of the  cornea does not
conform to the normal ※spherical§ curve,
although the eye is perfectly healthy.
Because the cornea is unevenly curved,
it refracts (bends) the light rays that
strike it to differing degrees. The  lens is
then unable to bring all the rays into
focus on the light-sensitive  retina. A
minor degree of astigmatism is normal
and does not require correction. More
severe astigmatism causes blurring of
lines at a particular angle and requires
correction, which be achieved by spe-
cial ※cylindrical§ glasses that can be
framed at a precise angle, contact lens-
es that can give an even spherical
surface for focusing, or laser surgery.
astringent A substance that causes tis-
sue to dry and shrink by reducing its
ability to absorb water. Astringents are
widely used in  antiperspirants and to
promote healing of broken or inflamed
skin. They are also used in some eye or
ear preparations. Astringents may cause
burning or stinging when applied.
astrocytoma A type of cancerous brain
tumour. Astrocytomas are the most com-
mon type of  glioma, a tumour arising
from the glial (supporting) cells in the
nervous system. They most commonly
develop in the cerebrum (the main
mass of the brain). Astrocytomas are
classified in 4 grades (I每IV) according to
their rate of growth and malignancy.
The most severe type is called glioblas-
toma multiforme. Symptoms are similar
to those of other types of brain tumour.
Diagnostic tests include CT scanning or
MRI.  Treatment is with surgery and, in
some cases, radiotherapy in addition.
asylum An outdated term for an institu-
tion providing care for the mentally ill. 
asymptomatic A medical term mean-
ing without  symptoms. For example,
hypertension is often asymptomatic and
is usually discovered during a routine
blood pressure test.
asystole A term meaning absence of the
heartbeat (see cardiac arrest).
ataxia Incoordination and clumsiness
that affects balance and gait, limb or
eye movements, and/or speech. Ataxia
may be caused by damage to the cere-
bellum  or to nerve pathways in the
brainstem and spinal cord. Possible
causes include injury to the brain or
spinal cord. In adults, ataxia may be
caused by  alcohol intoxication, a  stroke
or a brain tumour affecting the cerebel-
lum or the brainstem, a disease of the
balance organ in the ear, or  multiple
sclerosis or other types of nerve degener-
ation. In children, causes include acute
infection, brain tumours, and the inher-
ited condition Friedreich＊s ataxia.
Symptoms of ataxia depend on the
site of damage, although a lurching,
unsteady gait is common to most
forms. In addition, damage to certain
parts of the brain may cause nystagmus
and slurred speech. CT scanning or MRI
may be used to determine the cause of
ataxia. Treatment of the condition
depends on the cause. 
atelectasis Collapse of part or all of a
lung caused by obstruction of one or
more air passages in the lung. Obstruc-
tion may be caused by accumulation of
mucus, by an accidentally inhaled for-
eign body, by a tumour in the lung, or
by enlarged lymph nodes exerting pres-
sure on the airway.
The main symptom is shortness of
breath. There may also be a cough and
chest pain. The condition can be diag-
nosed by  chest X-ray. Treatment is
aimed at removing the cause of the
blockage and may include  physiother-
apy or bronchoscopy. If the obstruction
can be removed, the lung should rein-
flate normally.
atenolol A beta-blocker drug commonly
used to treat hypertension, angina, and
certain types of arrhythmia.
atheroma Fatty deposits on the inner
lining of an artery that occur in athero-
sclerosis and restrict blood flow.
ASTHMA, CARDIAC ATHEROMA
A57
atherosclerosis Accumulation of choles-
terol and other fatty substances (lipids)
in the walls of arteries, causing them to
narrow. Atherosclerosis can affect arter-
ies in any area of the body and is a
major cause of stroke, heart attack (see
myocardial infarction), and poor circula-
tion in the legs. The arteries become
narrowed when fatty substances, such
as cholesterol, that are carried in the
blood accumulate on the inside lining
of the arteries and form yellow deposits
called atheroma. These deposits restrict
blood flow through the arteries. In addi-
tion, the muscle layer of the artery wall
becomes thickened, narrowing the artery
even more.Platelets (tiny blood cells
responsible for clotting) may collect in
clumps on the surface of the deposits
and initiate the formation of blood
clots. A large clot may completely block
the artery, resulting in the organ it sup-
plies being deprived of oxygen.
There are usually no symptoms in the
early stages of atherosclerosis. Later,
symptoms are caused by reduced or
total absence of a blood supply to the
organs supplied by the affected arteries.
If the coronary arteries, which supply
the heart muscle, are partially blocked,
symptoms may include the chest pain
of angina. If there is complete blockage
in a coronary artery, a sudden, often fatal,
heart attack may occur. Many strokes
are a result of atherosclerosis in the
arteriesthat supply blood to the brain.
If atherosclerosis affects the leg arter-
ies, the 1st symptom may be cramping
pain when walking due to poor blood
flow to the leg muscles. If the condition
is associated with an inherited lipid
disorder (see  hyperlipidaemias), fatty
deposits may develop on tendons or
under the skin in visible lumps.
The risk of developing atherosclerosis
is determined largely by the level of
cholesterol in the bloodstream, which
depends on dietary and genetic factors.
Athersclerosis is most common in West-
ern countries, where most people eat a
diet high in fat. Some disorders such as
diabetes mellitus can be associated with
a high cholesterol level regardless of diet.
Blood flow through an artery can be
investigated by angiography or Doppler
ultrasound scanning. 
The best treatment for atherosclerosis
is to prevent it from progressing by fol-
lowing a healthy lifestyle. This includes
eating a low-fat diet, not smoking, exer-
cising regularly, and maintaining the
recommended weight for height. These
measures lead to a lower-than-average
risk of developing significant athero-
sclerosis. People found to have high
blood cholesterol but who are other-
wise in good health will be advised to
adopt a low-fat diet. They may also be
given drugs that decrease blood choles-
terol levels (see  lipid-lowering drugs).
For people who have had a heart attack,
research has shown that there may be a
benefit in lowering blood cholesterol
levels, even if the level is within the
average range for healthy people.
People who have atherosclerosis and
are experiencing symptoms of the con-
dition may be prescribed a drug such as
aspirin to reduce the risk of blood clots
forming on the damaged artery lining. 
ATHEROSCLEROSIS ATHEROSCLEROSIS
A ATHEROSCLEROSIS
ADVANCED ATHEROSCLEROSIS EARLY ATHEROSCLEROSIS
Fatty
deposit
Muscle layer
of artery
Fat
globule
Fatty
deposit
Thickened
muscle layer
New
muscle cell
Narrowed
artery58
Surgical treatment such as coronary
angioplasty (see  angioplasty, balloon)
may be recommended for those people
thought to be at high risk of severe
complications. If blood flow to the heart
is severely obstructed, a  coronary by-
pass operation to restore blood flow
may be carried out. 
athetosis A disorder of the nervous
system that is characterized by slow,
writhing, involuntary movements, most
often of the face, head, neck, and limbs.
These movements commonly include
facial grimacing, with contortions of the
mouth. There may also be difficulty in
balancing and walking. Athetosis tends
to be combined with chorea (jerky invol-
untary movements). Both athetosis and
chorea arise from damage to the  basal
ganglia, clusters of nerve cells in the
brain that control movement. Causes of
athetosis include brain damage prior 
to or at birth (see  cerebral palsy),  en-
cephalitis (brain infection), degenerative
disorders such as Huntington＊s disease,
or as a side effect of  phenothiazine
drugs or levodopa.
athlete＊s foot A common condition in
which the skin between the toes be-
comes itchy and sore, and may crack,
peel, or blister. It is due to a fungal
infection but may also be caused by
bacteria. Because the fungi thrive in
humid conditions, athlete＊s foot is more
common in people with particularly
sweaty feet and with shoes and socks
made from synthetic fibres, which do
not absorb sweat. Self-treatment with
topical antifungal drugs is usually effec-
tive and should be combined with
careful washing and drying of the feet.
atlas The topmost cervical  vertebra in
the human  spine. The atlas is attached
to and supports the skull. A pivot joint
attaching the atlas to the second cervi-
cal vertebra, the axis, allows the atlas to
rotate and therefore the head to turn
from side to side.
atony Loss of tension in a muscle, so
that it is completely flaccid. Atony can
occur in some nervous system disorders
or after injury to nerves. For example,
the arm muscles may become atonic
after injury to the brachial plexus (nerve
roots in the neck passing into the arm).
atopic eczema The most common form
of  eczema.  It usually begins in infancy
but may flare up during adolescence and
adulthood. The cause is unknown, but
people with atopy are more susceptible.
atopy A predisposition to various allergic
reactions (see  allergy). Atopic indivi-
duals have a tendency to suffer from
one or more allergic disorders, such as
asthma,  eczema,  urticaria, and allergic
rhinitis (hay fever). The mechanism that
underlies the predisposition is unclear,
but atopy does seem to run in families.
ATP An abbreviation for the compound
adenosine triphosphate, the principal
energy-carrying chemical in the body.
(See also ADP; metabolism.) 
atresia Congenital absence or severe nar-
rowing of a body opening or tubular
organ, due to a failure of development
in the uterus. Examples are biliary atresia,
in which the bile duct between the liver
and duodenum are absent; oesophageal
atresia, in which the oesophagus comes
to a blind end; and anal atresia (see
anus, imperforate), in which the anal
canal is shut off. Most forms of atresia
require surgical correction early in life. 
atrial fibrillation A type of abnormal-
ity of the heartbeat (see  arrhythmia,
cardiac) in which the atria (see  atrium)
of the heart beat irregularly and rapidly.
The ventricles (lower chambers) also
beat irregularly. The heart＊s pumping
ability is reduced as a result. Atrial fib-
rillation can occur in almost any
longstanding heart disease but is most
often associated with heart-valve disor-
ders or coronary artery disease.
Sudden onset of atrial fibrillation can
cause palpitations, angina, or breathless-
ness. The heart＊s inefficient pumping
action reduces the output of blood into
the circulation. Blood clots may form in
the atria and may enter the bloodstream
and lodge in an artery (see embolism).
Diagnosis of atrial fibrillation is con-
firmed by ECG. Digoxin or beta-blocker
drugs may be given to control the heart-
rate. Atrial fibrillation of recent onset
may be reversed by  defibrillation. In
most cases,  anticoagulant drugs are
given to reduce the risk of embolism.
atrial flutter A type of abnormality of
the heartbeat (see  arrhythmia, cardiac)
ATHETOSIS ATRIAL FLUTTER
A59
in which the atria beat regularly and
very rapidly. Symptoms and treatment
are the same as for atrial fibrillation. 
atrial natriuretic peptide A substance
produced in special cells in the muscu-
lar wall of the atria (see  atrium) of the
heart. Atrial natriuretic peptide is re-
leased into the bloodstream in response
to swelling of the atrial muscle due, for
example, to heart failure or hypertension.
It lowers blood pressure by increasing
the amount of sodium excreted in the
urine, which reduces blood volume.
atrial septal defect (ASD) A congeni-
tal heart abnormality (see heart disease,
congenital) in which there is a hole in
the dividing wall (see  septal defect)
between the heart＊s 2 upper chambers,
or atria (see atrium).
atrioventricular node A small knot of
specialized muscle cells in the right
atrium of the heart. Electrical impulses
from the  sinoatrialnode pass through
the atrioventricular node and along
conducting fibres to the  ventricles,
causing them to contract. 
atrium Either of the 2 (right and left)
upper chambers of the heart that collect
blood from the body and lungs res-
pectively. The atria
open directly into
the ventricles.
atrophy Wasting
away or shrinkage
of a normally de-
veloped tissue or
organ due to a re-
duction in the size
or number of its
cells. Atrophy is
commonly caused
by disuse or inade-
quate cell nutrition
due to poor blood
circulation. It may
also occur during
prolonged illness,
when the body needs to use up the pro-
tein reserves in muscles. In some
circumstances, atrophy is a normal pro-
cess, as in ovarian atrophy in women
who have passed the menopause.
atropine An  anticholinergic drug der-
ived from  belladonna. Atropine is used
to dilate the pupil in eye conditions
such as  iritis (inflammation of the iris)
and corneal ulcer. It is also used in chil-
dren before eye examination. Atropine
may be included in a  premedication
before general  anaesthesia  to reduce
respiratory secretions and is also used
as an emergency treatment for  brady-
cardia (abnormally slow heartbeat). It is
sometimes combined with an  anti-
diarrhoeal drug to relieve abdominal
cramps accompanying diarrhoea.
Adverse effects include dry mouth,
blurred vision, retention of urine, and,
in the elderly, confusion. Atropine eye-
drops are rarely given to adults because
they cause disturbance of vision lasting
2每3 weeks and may precipitate acute
glaucoma in susceptible people.
attachment An affectionate bond be-
tween individuals, especially between a
parent and child (see bonding), or a per-
son and an object, as in a young child
and a security blanket. The term is also
used to refer to the site at which a mus-
cle or tendon is attached to a bone. 
attention deficit hyperactivity dis-
order (ADHD) A behavioural disorder
in which a child has a consistently high
level of activity and/or difficulty in
attending to tasks. Attention deficit
hyperactivity, or hyperkinetic, disorder
affects up to 1 in 20 children in the UK.
The disorder, which is more common in
boys, should not be confused with the
normal boisterous conduct of a healthy
child. Children with ADHD consistently
show abnormal patterns of behaviour
over a period of time. An affected child
is likely to be restless, unable to sit still
for more than a few moments, inatten-
tive, and impulsive.
The causes of ADHD are not fully
understood, but the disorder often runs
in families, which suggests that genetic
factors may be involved. ADHDis not,
as popularly believed, a result of poor
parenting or abuse.
Symptoms develop in early childhood,
usually between the ages of 3 and 7,
and may include inability to finish
tasks; short attention span; inability to
concentrate in class; difficulty in follow-
ing instructions; a tendency to talk
excessively, frequently interrupting other
people; difficulty in waiting or taking
ATTENTION DEFICIT  ATRIAL NATRIURETIC PEPTIDE
A
Left atrium
of heart
ATRIUM
Right
atrium of
heart
STRUCTURE OF HEART60
turns; inability to play quietly alone;
and physical impulsiveness. Children
with ADHD may have difficulty in form-
ing friendships. Self-esteem is often low
because an affected child is frequently
scolded and criticized.
Treatment includes behaviour modifi-
cation techniques, both at home and at
school. In some children, avoidance of
certain foods or food additives seems to
reduce symptoms. In severe cases, stim-
ulant drugs, usually  methylphenidate,
may be prescribed. Paradoxically, the use
of stimulants in ADHD reduces hyper-
activity and improves concentration. In
general, the condition improves by ado-
lescence but may be followed by
antisocial behaviour and drug abuse or
substance abuse.
audiogram A graph produced as a
result of  audiometry that shows the
hearing threshold (the minimum audi-
ble decibel level) for each of a range of
sound frequencies.
audiology The study of hearing, espe-
cially of impaired hearing that cannot
be corrected by drugs or surgery. 
audiometry Measurement of the sense
of hearing. The term often refers to hear-
ingtests in which a machine is used to
produce sounds of a defined intensity
and frequency and in which the hearing
in each ear is measured over the full
range of normally audible sounds. 
auditory nerve The part of the vestibu-
locochlear nerve (the 8th  cranial nerve)
concerned with hearing. 
aura A peculiar ※warning§ sensation that
precedes or marks the onset of a  mi-
graine attack or of a seizure in epilepsy.
A migraine attack may be preceded by a
feeling of elation, excessive energy, or
drowsiness. Thirst or a craving for sweet
foods may develop. Migraine may be her-
alded by flashing light before the eyes,
blurred or tunnel vision, or difficulty in
speaking. There may also be weakness,
numbness, or tingling in 1 half of the body.
An epileptic aura may be a distorted
perception, such as a hallucinatory smell
or sound. One type of attack (in people
with  temporal lobe epilepsy) is often
preceded by a vague feeling of discom-
fort in the upper abdomen and followed
by a sensation of fullness in the head.
auranofin A  gold preparation used as
an  antirheumatic drug in the treatment
of rheumatoid arthritis. Unlike other gold
preparations, auranofin is taken orally.
auricle Another name for the pinna, the 
external flap of the ear. The term is also
used to describe ear-like appendages of
the atria (see atrium) of the heart.
auriscope An instrument for examining
the ear, also called an otoscope.
auscultation The procedure of listening
to sounds within the body by using a
stethoscope. Some organs make sounds
during normal functioning, such as the
movement of fluid through the stomach
and intestine, the opening and closing
of heart valves (see  heart sounds), and
the flow of air through the lungs. Abnor-
mal sounds may indicate disease.
autism A rare condition in which a child
is unable to relate to people and situa-
tions. Autism is more common in boys.
It is by definition evident before the age
of 30 months and is usually apparent in
the 1st year of life. The precise causes
of autism are unknown. Often, autistic
children seem normal for the 1st few
months of life before becoming increas-
ingly unresponsive to parents or other
stimuli. Extreme resistance to change
of any kind is an important feature. The
child reacts with distress to alteration
in routine or interference with activities.
Rituals develop in play, and there is
often attachment to unusual objects or
obsession with one particular idea. Delay
in speaking is common and most autis-
tic children have a low  IQ. Behavioural
abnormalities may include rocking, self-
injury, screaming fits, and hyperactivity. 
Despite these symptoms, appearance
and muscular coordination are normal.
Some autistic people have an isolated
special skill, such as an outstanding
rote memory or musical ability. 
There is no effective treatment for aut-
ism, whichis lifelong. Special schooling,
support and  counselling for families,
and sometimes  behaviour therapy can
be helpful. Medication is useful only for
specific problems, such as hyperactivity.
The majority of autistic people need
special, sometimes institutional, care.
autism spectrum disorders A range
of developmental disorders, usually
AUDIOGRAMAUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS
A61
first diagnosed in childhood, that are
characterized by obsessive behaviour
and impaired communication and social
skills (see autism; Asperger＊s syndrome).
autoantibody An  antibody that reacts
against the body＊s own cells (see
autoimmune disorders).
autoclave An apparatus that produces
steam at high pressure within a sealed
chamber. Autoclaving is used in hos-
pitals for the sterilization of surgical
equipment (see sterilization).
autoimmune disorders Any of a num-
ber of disorders caused by a reaction of
the  immune system against the body＊s
own cells and tissues. Bacteria, viruses,
and drugs may play a role in initiating
an autoimmune disorder, but in most
cases the trigger is unknown. 
Autoimmune disorders are classified
into organ-specific and non-organ-spe-
cific types. In organ-specific disorders,
the autoimmune process is directed
mainly against one organ. Examples
include Hashimoto＊s thyroiditis (thyroid
gland), pernicious  anaemia (stomach),
Addison＊s disease (adrenal glands), and
type 1  diabetes mellitus (pancreas). In
non-organ-specific disorders, autoim-
mune activity is towards a tissue, such
as connective tissue, that is widespread
in the body. Examples of non-organ-
specific disorders are systemic  lupus
erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis.
Initial treatment for any autoimmune
disorder is to reduce the effects of the
disease, for example by replacing hor-
mones that are not being produced. In
cases in which the disease is having
widespread effects, treatment is also
directed at diminishing the activity of
the immune system while maintaining
the body＊s ability to fight disease. Corti-
costeroid drugs are most commonly
used but may be combined with other
immunosuppressant drugs.
automatism A state in which behaviour
is not controlled by the conscious mind.
The individual carries out activities
without being aware of doing so, and
later has no clear memory of what hap-
pened. Automatism is uncommon and
may be a symptom of  temporal lobe
epilepsy,  dissociative disorders, drug or
alcohol intoxication, or hypoglycaemia. 
autonomic nervous system The part
of the nervous system that controls the
involuntary activities of a variety of
body tissues. The autonomic nervous
system is divided into the sympathetic
and parasympathetic nervous systems.
The sympathetic nervous system com-
prises 2 chains of nerves that pass from
the spinal cord throughout the body tis-
sues. Into these tissues, the nerve
endings release the  neurotransmitters
adrenaline  (epinephrine) and noradren-
aline (norepinephrine). The system also
stimulates adrenaline release from the
adrenal glands. In general, the actions of
the sympathetic nervous system height-
en activity in the body, quickening the
heartbeat and breathing rate, widening
blood vessels, and inducing sweating. 
The parasympathetic nervous system
is composed of a chain of nerves that
passes from the brain and another that
leaves the lower spinal cord. The nerves
are distributed to the same tissues that
are supplied by the sympathetic nerves.
The parasympathetic nerves release the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine, which has
the opposite effect to adrenaline and nor-
adrenaline. The parasympathetic system
is mainly concerned with everyday func-
tions such as digestion and excretion.
The 2 systems act in conjunction and
normally balance each other. During
exercise or at times of stress, the sym-
pathetic system predominates, however,
while during sleep the parasympathetic
system exerts more control.
autopsy A postmortem examination of
the body, including the internal organs,
usually to determine cause of death.
autosome Any chromosome that is not
a sex chromosome. Of the 23 pairs of
chromosomes in each human cell, 22
pairs are autosomes.
autosuggestion Putting oneself into a
receptive hypnotic-like state as a means
of stimulating the body＊s ability to heal
itself. For example, in one method used
to control anxiety symptoms, people are
taught muscular relaxation (biofeedback)
techniques and learn to summon up
calming imagery or pleasant thoughts. 
avascular necrosis The death of cells
in body tissue caused by damage to
blood vessels supplying the area.
AVASCULAR NECROSIS AUTOANTIBODY
A62
azelaicacid A topical drug used to treat
mild to moderate acne.
azithromycin A macrolide  antibiotic
drug used to treat infections of the skin,
chest, throat, and ears. Azithromycin is
also used to treat genital infections due
to chlamydia (see chlamydial infections).
azoospermia The absence of sperm from
semen, causing infertility in males. Azoo-
spermia may be caused by a disorder
present at birth or that develops later in
life or after vasectomy.
Congenital azoospermia may be due
to a  chromosomal abnormality such as
Klinefelter＊s syndrome; failure of the
testes to descend into the scrotum;
absence of the vasa deferentia (ducts
that carry sperm from the testes to the
seminal vesicles); or cystic fibrosis.
In some males, azoospermia may be
the result of hormonal disorders affect-
ing the onset of puberty. Another cause
is blockage of the vasa deferentia,
which may follow a sexually transmitted
infection, tuberculosis, or surgery on the
groin. Azoospermia can also be the re-
sult of damage to the testes. This can
follow radiotherapy, treatment with cer-
tain drugs, and prolonged exposure to
heat, or the effects of occupational
exposure to toxic chemicals.
If the cause is treatable, sperm pro-
duction may restart. However, in some
cases, the testes will have been perma-
nently damaged.
AZT The abbreviation for azidothymi-
dine, the former name for zidovudine.
aztreonam An  antibiotic used to treat
some types of meningitis and infections
by certain types of bacteria, including
PSEUDOMONAS.
AVERSION THERAPY AZTREONAM
A aversion therapy An outdated form of
behaviour therapy in which unpleasant
stimuli, such as electric shocks, are
administered at the same time as an
unwanted behaviour in an attempt to
alter behavioural patterns.
aviation medicine The medical spe-
ciality concerned with the physiological
effects of air travel and with the causes
and treatment of medical problems that
may occur during a flight.
avulsed tooth A tooth that has become
completely dislodged from its socket
following an injury. If the tooth is kept
moist, and treatment is sought immedi-
ately, reimplantation may be possible
(see reimplantation, dental). 
avulsion The tearing away of a body
structure from its point of attachment.
For example, excessive contraction of a
tendon may avulse a small piece of
bone at its attachment point. Avulsion
may be due to an injury or be per-
formed as part of a surgical procedure.
axilla The medical name for the armpit.
axis The 2nd cervical  vertebra in the
human spine. The axis is attached by a
pivot joint to the atlas, the topmost ver-
tebra, which in turn is attached to the
base of the skull. The pivot joint allows
the head to turn to either side.
axon The thin, elongated part of a neu-
ron (nerve cell) that conducts nerve
impulses. Many axons in the body are
covered with a fatty myelin sheath.
Ayurvedism See Indian medicine.
azathioprine An immunosuppressant drug
used to treat severe rheumatoid arthritis
and other  autoimmune disorders. It is
also used to prevent organ rejection
after  transplant surgery. Increased sus-
ceptibility to infection is a side effect.
Axon
(nerve fibre)
Myelin
sheath
Nerve cell body 
AXON
Nucleus
Nerve-cell
ending
NERVE CELL63
Babinski＊s sign A reflex movement in
which the big toe bends upwards when
the outer edge of the sole of the foot is
scratched. In adults, Babinski＊s sign in-
dicates damage or disease of the brain
or the spinal cord. In babies, Babinski＊s
sign is a normal reflex.
baby blues A common name for a mild
form of depression that sometimes
occurs in women after childbirth. Baby
blues almost always disappears without
treatment but can occasionally develop
into a more serious depressive illness
(see postnatal depression). 
bacilli Rod-shaped  bacteria.  The singu-
lar term is bacillus.
back The area between the shoulders
and the buttocks. The back is supported
by the spinal column (see spine), which
is bound together by ligaments and
supported by muscles that also control
posture and movement. Disorders that
affect the bones, muscles, ligaments,
tendons, nerves, and joints in the spine
may cause  back pain. (See also  spine,
disorders of.)
back pain Pain affecting the back, often
restricting movement. The pain usually
lasts for only a week or so but can recur
in some people. Rarely, persistent back
pain causes long-term disability.
Back pain is usually caused by minor
damage to the ligaments and muscles
in the back. The lower back is especially
vulnerable to these problems because it
supports most of the body＊s weight and
is under continual stress from move-
ments such as bending, twisting, and
stretching. Less commonly, lower back
pain may  result from an underlying dis-
order such as a prolapsed intervertebral
disc (see disc prolapse) in the spine. 
In most cases, back pain can be trea-
ted with over-the-counter painkillers
(see  analgesic drugs) such as  aspirin
and related drugs, nonsteroidal anti-
B
inflammatory drugs, or  muscle-relaxant
drugs. If the pain persists, a heat pad, a
wrapped hot-water bottle or, sometimes,
an ice-pack, may provide additional
relief. Generally, it is advisable to
remain as active as the pain permits.
People whose pain worsens or is still
too severe to allow normal movement
after several days should consult a doc-
tor for medical tests.
Investigations for back pain, such as
X-rays, CT scanning, or MRI, sometimes
reveal abnormalities, such as disc pro-
lapse, that require surgical treatment and
can be treated by a microdiscectomy.
Other treatments for back pain include
acupuncture, spinal injection, exercise,
or spinal manipulation.
baclofen A muscle-relaxant drug that is
used to relieve muscle spasm and stiff-
ness due to brain or spinal cord injury,
stroke, or neurological disorders such
as multiple sclerosis. Adverse effects of
baclofen include drowsiness and muscle
weakness; these side effects can be lim-
ited, however, by increasing the dose of
the drug gradually.
bacteraemia The presence of bacteria in
the bloodstream. Bacteraemia occurs
briefly after many minor surgical oper-
ations and dental treatment. The immune
system usually prevents the bacteria
from multiplying and causing damage.
However, in people who have abnormal
heart valves, the bacteria may settle on
the valve and cause endocarditis. If the
immune system is damaged or sup-
pressed, septicaemia (an infection of the
blood) may develop.
bacteria Single-celled  microorganisms
that are invisible to the naked eye. The
singular form of the term is bacterium.
Abundant in the air, soil, and water,
most bacteria are harmless to humans.
Some bacteria, such as those that live
in the intestine, are beneficial and help
to break down food for digestion. Bacteria
that cause disease are known as patho-
gens and are classified by shape into 
3 main groups: cocci (spherical); bacilli
(rod-shaped); and spirochaetes or spir-
illa (spiral-shaped). Many bacteria have
whip-like threads called flagella, which
enable them to move in fluids, and pili,
which anchor them to other cells.
BACTERIA BABINSKI＊S SIGN
B64
Aerobic bacteria require oxygen to grow
and multiply; in the body, these are
most commonly found on the skin or in
the respiratory system. Anaerobic bac-
teria thrive where there is no oxygen,
deep within tissue or wounds. They
reproduce by simple division, which can
take place every 20minutes. Some bacte-
ria also produce spores that can survive
high temperatures, dry conditions, and
lack of nourishment; and some produce
poisons (either endotoxins or exotox-
ins) that are harmful to human cells.
The body＊s  immune system attacks
invading bacteria, but in some cases
treatment with antibiotic drugs is neces-
sary and will speed recovery. Superficial
inflammation and infected wounds may
be treated with antiseptics. Immunity to
invading bacterial diseases, such as
some types of  meningitis, can be ac-
quired by active immunization. (See also
infectious disease.)
bacterial vaginosis An infection of the
vagina that causes a greyish-white dis-
charge and itching. The disorder is due 
toexcessive growth of bacteria that
normally live in the vagina. It is more
common in sexually active women and
is treated with antibiotic drugs.
bactericidal A term used to describe
any substance that kills bacteria. (See
also antibacterial drugs; antibiotic drugs.)
bacteriology The study of bacteria, par-
ticularly of the types that cause disease.
Bacteriology includes techniques used
to isolate and identify bacteria from
specimens such as a throat swab or
urine. Bacteria are identified by their ap-
pearance under a microscope, including
their response to stains (see  staining)
and the use of culture. Testing for sensi-
tivity to antibiotics may be performed. 
bacteriostatic A term used to describe
a substance that stops the growth or
multiplication of bacteria but does not
kill them. (See also  antibacterial drugs;
antibiotic drugs.)
bacteriuria The presence of bacteria in
the urine that is abnormal.
bad breath See halitosis.
bagassosis A rare disease affecting the
lungs of workers who handle mouldy
bagasse (the fibrous residue of sugar-
cane after juice extraction). Bagassosis
is one cause of allergic alveolitis. Symp-
toms develop 4每5hours after inhaling
dust and include shortness of breath,
wheezing, fever, headache, and cough.
Repeated dust exposure may lead to
permanent lung damage.
Baker＊s cyst A fluid-filled lump behind
the knee. A Baker＊s cyst is caused by
increased pressure in the knee joint due
to a buildup of fluid in a disorder such
as  rheumatoid arthritis. Most Baker＊s
cysts are painless, and some disappear
spontaneously. Occasionally, a cyst may
rupture, producing pain and swelling in
the calf that can mimic a deep vein
thrombosis (see thrombosis, deep vein).
Diagnosis of a Baker＊s cyst is confirmed
by  ultrasound scanning. Treatment is
rarely needed.
balance The ability to remain upright and
move without falling over. Information on
body position is relayed to the brain by
many parts of the body: the eyes; pro-
prioceptors (sense organs) in the skin,
muscle, and joints; and the labyrinth of
the inner ear. The cerebellum (part of the
brain) integrates the information and
sends instructions to enable various
parts of the body to perform adjust-
ments needed to maintain balance.
Disorders affecting the ear, brain, or
spinal cord commonly affect balance.
Ear disorders include  labyrinthitis and
M谷ni豕re＊s disease. Less commonly, otitis
media may affect balance.
BACTERIAL VAGINOSIS BALANCE
Flagellum
BACTERIA
Nucleoid containing
genetic material
Cell wall
B
A ROD-SHAPED BACTERIUM
Pilus65
Damage to nerve tracts in the spinal
cord, which carry information from pos-
ition sensors in the joints and muscles,
can also impair balance. This damage
may result from spinal tumours, circula-
tory disorders, nerve degeneration due
to deficiency of vitamin B12, or, rarely,
tabes dorsalis (a complication of syph-
ilis). A tumour or stroke that affects the
cerebellum may cause clumsiness of 
the arms and legs and other features 
of impaired muscular coordination.
balanitis Inflammation of the foreskin
and glans (head) of the penis. Balanitis
causes pain and/or itchiness, and the
entire area may be red and moist. Causes
include infection or chemical irritation
by contraceptive creams or laundry prod-
ucts. Treatment is usually with antibiotic
or antifungal drugs (as creams or taken
orally) and careful washing of the penis
and foreskin. Phimosis,  in which the
foreskin is overly tight, makes balanitis
more likely to recur. In such cases,  cir-
cumcision may be recommended.
baldness See alopecia. 
balloon catheter A flexible tube with a
balloon at its tip, which, when inflated,
keeps the tube in place or applies pres-
sure to an organ or vessel. One type is
used to drain urine from the bladder
(see  catheterization, urinary). Balloon
catheters are sometimes used to expand
narrowed arteries (balloon angioplasty).
They may also be used to control bleed-
ing oesophageal varices before surgery.
balm A soothing or healing medicine
applied to the skin.
bambuterol A bronchodilator drug that
is converted to  terbutaline in the liver.
Bambuterol can only be taken orally.
bandage A strip or tube of fabric used
to keep  dressings in position, to apply
pressure, to control bleeding, or to sup-
port a sprain or strain. Roller bandages
are the most widely used. Tubular gauze
bandages require a special applicator
and are used mainly for areas that are
awkward to bandage, such as a finger.
Triangular bandages are used to make
slings. (See also wounds.)
barber＊s itch See sycosis barbae.
barbiturate drugs A group of sedative
drugs that work by depressing activity
within the brain. They include thiopental
and phenobarbital. In the past, barbitu-
rates were widely used as  antianxiety
drugs and sleeping drugs but have been
largely replaced by benzodiazepine drugs
and other nonbarbiturates. Barbiturates
are now strictly controlled because they
are habit-forming and widely abused.
An overdose can be fatal, particularly in
combination with alcohol, which danger-
ously increases the depressant effect 
on the brain (including suppression of
the respiratory centre). However, pheno-
barbital is still commonly used as an
anticonvulsantdrug in the treatment of
epilepsy. Thiopental is very short acting
and is used to induce anaesthesia (see
anaesthesia, general). 
barium X-ray examinations Proce-
dures used to detect and follow the
progress of some gastrointestinal tract
disorders. Because X-rays do not pass
through it, barium is used to outline
organs, such as the stomach, which are
not normally visible on an X-ray. In
some cases, barium X-rays are an alt-
ernative to endoscopy. Barium sulphate
mixed with water is passed into the part
of the tract requiring examination, and
X-rays are taken. X-rays may be single-
or double-contrast. Single-contrast bar-
ium X-rays use barium sulphate alone.
The barium fills the section of the tract
and provides an outline image that
shows up prominent abnormalities. In
double-contrast barium X-rays, the bar-
ium forms a thin film over the inner
surface of the tract, and the tract is
filled with air so that small surface
abnormalities can be seen.
Different types of barium X-ray exam-
ination are used to investigate different
parts of the gastrointestinal tract. Bar-
ium swallow involves drinking a barium
solution and is used to investigate the
oesophagus. A barium meal is carried
out to look at the lower oesophagus,
stomach, and duodenum. Barium follow-
through is used to investigate disorders
of the small intestine; X-rays are taken
at intervals as the barium reaches the
intestine. A barium enema is used to
investigate disorders of the large intes-
tine and rectum; barium is introduced
though a tube inserted in the rectum.
Barium remaining in the intestine may
BARIUM X-RAY EXAMINATIONS BALANITIS
Bpressure changes can rupture the ear-
drum (see eardrum, perforated).
Barotrauma can be avoided by vigor-
ous swallowing or by forcibly breathing
out with the mouth closed and the nose
pinched (the Valsalva manoeuvre). This
action equalizes the internal and exter-
nal pressures in the middle ear and
sinuses. If the eustachian tubes are
blocked, as commonly occurs with a cold,
use of a nasal spray containing a decon-
gestant drug is recommended shortly
before the descent of the aircraft.
Infants should be breast- or bottle-fed
during descent to encourage swallow-
ing. (See also aviation medicine.) 
barrier cream A cream used to protect
the skin against the effects of irritant
substances and of excessive exposure
to water. (See also sunscreens.)
barrier method A method of prevent-
ing pregnancy by blocking the passage
of sperm to the uterus, for example by
using a condom or a diaphragm. (See
also contraception, barrier methods of.)
barrier nursing The nursing technique
by which a patient with an infectious
disease is prevented from infecting
cause constipation. Therefore, it is im-
portant to  have a high-fibre diet and
drink plenty of water after a barium
examination, until all the barium has
passed through.
barotrauma Damage or pain, mainly af-
fecting the middle ear and facial sinuses,
that is caused by changes in surround-
ing air pressure. Air travellers are at the
greatest risk, but scuba divers face simi-
lar problems (see scuba-diving medicine).
Aircraft cabin pressure decreases as
the plane ascends and increases as it
descends. As the aircraft ascends, the
ears may ※pop§ as the air in the middle
ear expands and is expelled via the eus-
tachian tubes, which connect the
middle ear to the back of the throat. On
descent, the higher pressure may push
the eardrum inwards and cause pain.
Minor pressure damage in the middle
ear may cause pain, hearing loss, and
tinnitus for a few days; damage within
the facial sinuses may also cause pain,
and possibly a discharge of mucus or
blood. Symptoms usually wear off with-
in hours or days, but treatment may be
needed if they worsen or persist. Large
BARIUM X-RAY EXAMINATIONS
Monitor
showing
barium in the
oesophagus
66
BAROTRAUMA BARRIER NURSING
B
X-ray machine takes
a series of pictures
BARIUM SWALLOW
Patient drinks
a solution of
bariumother people (see  isolation). In reverse
barrier nursing, a patient with reduced
ability to fight infections is protected
against outside infection. (See also
aseptic technique.)
bartholinitis An infection of Bartholin＊s
glands, at the entrance to the  vagina,
that may be due to a sexually transmit-
ted infection such as  gonorrhoea. It
causes an intensely painful red swelling
at the opening of the ducts. Treatment
is with antibiotic drugs, analgesic drugs,
and warm baths. Bartholinitis some-
times leads to an abscess or a painless
cyst (called a Bartholin＊s cyst), which
may become infected. Abscesses are
drained under general  anaesthesia.
Recurrent abscesses or infected cysts
may need surgery to convert the duct
into an open pouch (see marsupializa-
tion) or to remove the gland completely
Bartholin＊s glands A pair of oval, pea-
sized glands whose ducts open into the
vulva (the folds of flesh that surround
the opening of the vagina). During sexu-
al arousal, these glands secrete a fluid
to lubricate the vulval region. Infection
of the glands causes bartholinitis.
basal cell carcinoma A type of skin
cancer, also known as a rodent ulcer or
BCC, that occurs most commonly on
the face or neck. It starts as a small, flat
nodule and grows slowly, eventually
forming a shallow ulcer with raised
pearly edges. Basal cell carcinoma is
caused by skin damage from the ultra-
violet radiation in sunlight. Fair-skinned
people over 50 are the most commonly
affected; dark and black-skinned people
are protected by the larger amount of
67
the skin pigment  melanin. The risk is
reduced by avoiding overexposure to
strong sunlight, using  sunscreens, and
wearing protective clothing and sun
hats. Without treatment, the carcinoma
gradually invades and destroys surround-
ing tissues but virtually never spreads
to other parts of the body. Treatment is
usually with surgery (or in some cases
radiotherapy) and is often completely
successful. Plastic surgery may also be
needed, however, depending on the size
and site of the tumour. People who
have had a basal cell carcinoma may
develop new tumours and should be
alert to any changes in their skin. (See
also melanoma, malignant; squamous cell
carcinoma; sunlight, adverse effects of.)
basal ganglia Paired nerve cell clusters
deep within the cerebrum (the main
mass of the  brain) and upper part of 
the brainstem. The basal ganglia play a
vital part in producing smooth, contin-
uous muscular actions and in stopping
and starting movement. Any disease or
degeneration affecting the basal ganglia
and their connections may lead to the
appearance of involuntary movements,
trembling, and weakness, as occur in
Parkinson＊s disease.
base see alkali.
basophil A type of white blood cell that
plays a part in inflammatory and aller-
gic reactions.
B-cell See lymphocyte.
BCG vaccination A vaccine that pro-
vides immunity against tuberculosis. BCG
is prepared from an artificially weak-
ened  strain of bovine (cattle) tubercle
bacilli, the microorganisms responsible
for the disease. BCG stands for ※bacille
Calmette每Gu谷rin§, after the 2 French-
men who developed the vaccine in 1906.
BCG is given to people at risk of tuber-
culosis and for whom a tuberculin test is
negative. These people include health
workers, contacts of people who have
tuberculosis, and immigrants (including
children) from countries with a high rate
of tuberculosis. Infants born to immi-
grants in this category are immunized,
without having a tuberculin test, within
a few days of birth. The vaccine is also
recommended for children aged 10每14
years for whom the test is negative.
BCG VACCINATION BARTHOLINITIS
B
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA
Raised edge
of carcinoma
Shallow
ulcer68
beclometasone A  corticosteroid drug
that is used in the treatment of asthma
and hay fever (see  rhinitis, allergic).
Beclometasone, which is prescribed as
an inhaler or nasal spray, controls the
symptoms by reducing inflammation
and mucus production in the lining of
the nose or, in asthma, inflammation 
of the airways. The drug is often given
with  bronchodilator drugs in the man-
agement of asthma. A severe asthma
attack may require the dose to be in-
creased. The action of beclometasone is
slow, however, and its full effect takes
several days to occur. Adverse effects of
the drug may include hoarseness, throat
irritation, and, on rare occasions, fungal
infections in the mouth. Beclometasone
is also prescribed in the form of a cream
or ointment to treatinflammation of the
skin caused by eczema.
becquerel A unit of radioactivity (see
radiation units).
bed bath A method of washing a per-
son who is confined to bed. 
bedbug A flat, wingless, brown insect
about 5mm long and 3mm wide. Bed-
bugs live in furniture, especially beds
and carpets, emerging at night to feed
on humans by sucking blood. They are
not known to transmit disease, but their
bites are itchy and may become infected.
bedpan A metal, plastic, or fibre con-
tainer into which a patient can defaecate
or urinate without getting out of bed.
bed rest A term used to describe peri-
ods spent in bed. Bed rest may be a
part of treatment in certain illnesses,
such as  rheumatic fever, and for some
types of injury, such as a fractured ver-
tebra. Prolonged bed rest carries risks
such as muscle wasting, weakness, and
increased risk of blood clots developing
in the legs. Bed rest was once consid-
ered an essential part of the treatment
of many common conditions but is now
avoided whenever possible. Patients are
now encouraged to be mobile as soon
as possible after surgery.
bedridden A term used to describe a
person who is unable to leave their bed
due to illness or injury. People most
likely to be bedridden are the very
elderly, the terminally ill, and those
paralysed as the result of an accident.
bedsores See pressure sores.
bed-wetting The common name for poor
bladder control at night (see enuresis).
bee stings See insect stings.
behavioural problems in children
Behavioural problems range from mild,
short-lived periods of unacceptable
behaviour, which are common in most
children, to more severe problems such
as conduct disorders and refusal to go
to school. Behavioural problems may
occasionally occur in any child; special-
ist management is called for when the
problems become frequent and disrupt
school and/or family life. Some behavi-
oural problems can occur whatever the
family or home situation. In some cases,
however, stressful external events, such
as moving home or divorce, may pro-
duce periods of problem behaviour. 
Behavioural problems that are common
in babies and young children include
feeding difficulties (see  feeding, infant)
and sleeping problems, such as waking
repeatedly in the night. In toddlers,
breath-holding attacks,  tantrums, sepa-
ration anxiety, and  head-banging are
problems best dealt with by a consis-
tent and appropriate approach. Problems
with toilet-training are usually avoided if
the training is delayed until the child is
physically and emotionally ready. 
Between the ages of 4 and 8, behav-
ioural problems such as nail-biting and
thumb-sucking, clinginess,  nightmares,
and bed-wetting (see  enuresis) are so
common as to be almost normal. They
are best dealt with by a positive ap-
proach that concentrates on rewarding
good behaviour. In most cases, the child
grows out of the problem, but some-
times medical help may be needed.
behaviourism An American school of
psychology founded by John Broadus
Watson early in the 20th century. He
argued that, because behaviour, rather
than experience, was all that could be
observed in others, it should constitute
the sole basis of psychology.
behaviour therapy A collection of tech-
niques, based on psychological theory,
for changing abnormal behaviour or
treating anxiety. The treatment relies 
on 2 basic ideas: that exposure to a
feared experience under safe conditions
BECLOMETASONE BEHAVIOUR THERAPY
B69
will render it less threatening, and that
desirable behaviour can be encouraged
by using a system of rewards.
Specific behaviour therapy techniques
include exposure therapy (also called
desensitization), response prevention,
flooding, and modelling. Exposure ther-
apy is commonly used to treat phobic
disorders such as  agoraphobia, animal
phobias, and flying phobias. It consists
of exposing the patient in stages to the
cause of the anxiety. The patient is
taught to cope with anxiety symptoms
by using relaxation techniques. In
flooding, the patient is confronted with
the anxiety-provoking stimulus all at
once, but with the support of the thera-
pist. In response prevention, the patient
is prevented from carrying out an
obsessional task; the technique is used
in combination with other methods. In
modelling, the therapist acts as a
model for the patient, performing the
anxiety-provoking activity first, in order
that the patient may copy.
Beh?et＊s syndrome A rare, multisystem
disorder with recurrent  mouth ulcers
and  genital ulcers and inflammation of
the eyes, skin joints, blood vessels,
brain, and intestines. The cause of
Beh?et＊s syndrome is unknown, but it is
strongly associated with a genetically
determined  histocompatability antigen,
HLA-B51. Treatment is difficult and may
require  corticosteroid  and  immunosup-
pressant drugs. The condition often
becomes long-term.
belching The noisy return of air from
the stomach through the mouth. Swal-
lowing air is usually an unconscious
habit, which may result from eating or
drinking too much too quickly. Some-
times, belching alleviates discomfort
caused by indigestion.
belladonna An extract of the deadly
nightshade plant that has been used
medicinally since ancient times. It con-
tains  alkaloids, including  atropine, that
are used as  antispasmodic drugs in
treating gastrointestinal disturbances.
(See also anticholinergic drugs.)
Bell＊s palsy The most common form of
facial palsy (facial muscle weakness). 
bendrofluazide An alternative name
for bendroflumethiazide.
bendroflumethiazide A thiazide  diur-
etic drug used to treat hypertension and
heart failure. 
bends The nonmedical term for decom-
pressionsickness.
benign A term used to describe a dis-
ease that is relatively harmless. When
used to refer to tumours, benign means
noncancerous tumours that do not in-
vade or destroy local tissues and do not
spread to other sites within the body. 
benign prostatic hyperplasia(BPH)
A medical term for enlargement of the
prostate gland (see prostate, enlarged).
benorilate A  nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
matory drug that contains  aspirin and
paracetamol. Benorilate is mainly used
to relieve joint pain and stiffness in
osteoarthritis and  rheumatoid arthritis.
Side effects are not usually serious, but
the aspirin in the drug may cause nau-
sea or indigestion.
benzalkonium chloride A widely used
preservative in eye drops and products
such as cosmetics and mouth washes.
benzodiazepine drugs A group of
drugs given for short periods as  sleep-
ing drugs for  insomnia and to control
the symptoms of  anxiety or  stress (see
tranquillizer drugs). Common benzodi-
azepines include  diazepam, which is
used as a tranquillizer, and nitrazepam,
which is sometimes used for insomnia.
Benzodiazepines are also used in the
management of alcohol withdrawal and
in the control of epilepsy. 
Minor adverse effects of benzodiaz-
epines include daytime drowsiness,
dizziness, and forgetfulness. Unstead-
iness and slowed reactions may also
occur. Regular users may become psy-
chologically and physically dependent;
for this reason, the drugs are usually
given for courses of 2每3weeks or less.
When the drugs are stopped suddenly,
withdrawal symptoms, such as anxiety,
restlessness, and nightmares may
occur. Benzodiazepine drugs are some-
times abused for their sedative effect. 
benzoyl peroxide An  antiseptic agent
used in the treatment of acne and 
fungal skin infections (see  fungal infec-
tions). In acne, benzoyl peroxide also
acts by removing the surface layer of
skin, unblocking sebaceous glands.
BENZOYL PEROXIDE BEH?ET＊S SYNDROME
B70
benzylpenicillin A type of penicillin drug
that is given by injection.
bereavement The emotional reaction
following the death of a loved relative
or friend. The expression of grief is indi-
vidual to each person, but there are
recognized stages of bereavement, each
characterized by a particular attitude. In
the first stage, which may last from 3days
to 3months, there is numbness and an
unwillingness to recognize the death.
Hallucinations, in which the dead person
is seen, are a common experience. Once
the numbness wears off, the person may
be overwhelmed by feelings of anxiety,
anger, and despair that can develop into
a depressive illness (see depression). 
Insomnia, malaise, agitation, and tear-
fulness are also common. Gradually,
but usually within 2years, the bereaved
person adjusts to the loss.
Family and friends can often provide
support. Outside help may be required
and may be given by a social worker,
health visitor, member of the clergy, or
self-help group. For some people, when
depression, apathy, and lethargy imp-
ede any chance of recovery, specialized
counselling or  psychotherapy is neces-
sary. (See also stillbirth.)
beriberi A nutritional disorder result-
ing from a lack of thiamine (vitamin B1)
in the diet. Without thiamine, the brain,
nerves, and muscles (including the
heart muscle) are unable to function
properly. In developed countries, the ill-
ness is seen only in people who are
starving or on an extremely restricted
diet, such as alcoholics. There are 2
forms of the illness. In dry beriberi, thia-
mine deficiency mainly affects the
nerves and skeletal muscles. Symptoms
include numbness, a burning sensation
in the legs, and muscle wasting. In sev-
ere cases, the patient becomes virtually
paralysed, emaciated, and bedridden. In
wet beriberi, the main problem is heart
failure, which leads to oedema (swelling
caused by fluid accumulation) in the
legs, and sometimes also in the trunk
and face. Other symptoms of wet beri-
beri include poor appetite, rapid pulse,
and breathlessness. 
Beriberi is treated with thiamine,
given orally or by injection. 
berry aneurysm An abnormal swelling
that occurs at the junction of  arteries
supplying the brain. Berry aneurysms,
which are usually due to a  congenital
weakness, can sometimes rupture, re-
sulting in a subarachnoid haemorrhage.
(See also aneurysm.)
berylliosis An occupational disease that
is caused by the inhalation of dust or
fumes containing beryllium, a metallic
element which is used in high-technol-
ogy industries, such as nuclear energy,
electronics, and aerospace. Short expo-
sure to high concentrations of beryllium
may lead to an episode of severe pneu-
monitis. Exposure over a number of years
to smaller concentrations may lead to
permanent damage to lungs and liver.
Treatment with corticosteroid drugs can
reduce damage to the lungs. In most
cases, the introduction of safe working
practices prevents exposure to danger-
ous levels of berylliosis.
beta-blocker drugs A group of drugs,
also known as beta-adrenergic blocking
agents, prescribed principally to treat
heart and circulatory disorders such as
angina and hypertension. Beta-blockers
block the effects of the sympathetic ner-
vous system, which releases  adrenaline
(epinephrine) and  noradrenaline (nor-
epinephrine) at nerve endings that are
known as beta receptors.
There are 2 types of beta receptor:
beta 1 and beta 2. Beta 1 receptors are
present in the heart and blood vessels,
and beta 2 in the lungs. Some beta-
blockers (such as acebutolol, atenolol,
and metoprolol) are termed cardio-
selective and, because they act mostly
on beta 1 receptors, are used mainly to
treat heart disease such as angina,
hypertension, and cardiac  arrhythmia.
The drugs are sometimes given after a
myocardial infarction (heart attack) to
reduce the likelihood of further damage
to the heart muscle. 
Other types of beta-blocker, such as
oxprenolol, propranolol, and timolol,
may be given to prevent  migraine at-
tacks by acting on blood vessels in the
head; reduce the physical symptoms of
anxiety; or control the symptoms of thy-
rotoxicosis. Beta-blocker drugs such as
timolol are sometimes given in the 
BENZYLPENICILLIN BETA-BLOCKER DRUGS
B71
form of eye drops to treat  glaucoma
and work by lowering the fluid pressure
in the eyeball.
Beta-blockers may reduce an individ-
ual＊s capacity for strenuous exercise.
The drugs may worsen the symptoms 
of asthma, bronchitis, or other forms of
lung disease. They may also reduce the
flow of blood to the limbs, causing cold
hands and feet. In addition,  sleep dis-
turbance and depression can be side
effects of beta-blockers.
betahistine A drug used to treat M谷n-
i豕re＊s disease, reducing the frequency
and severity of the attacks of nausea
and vertigo.
betamethasone A  corticosteroid drug
used to treat inflammation. Betametha-
sone is applied to the skin as cream to
treat contact dermatitis and eczema. It is
also prescribed as nasal spray to treat
allergic rhinitis.
Betamethasone is taken by mouth to
treat some cases of asthma and arthritis.
Adverse effects are unlikely with short-
term use. However, prolonged topical
use of the drug can cause thinning of
the skin and may aggravate any infec-
tion. Taken orally for a prolonged period
or in high doses, betamethasone can
cause adverse effects typical of other
corticosteroid drugs.
bezoar A ball of food and mucus, veg-
etable fibre, hair, or other indigestible
material, in the stomach. Trichobezoars,
which are composed of hair, may form
in children or emotionally disturbed
adults who nibble at, or pull out and
swallow, their hair. Symptoms include
loss of appetite, constipation, nausea
and vomiting, and abdominal pain. If
trichobezoars pass into the intestines,
they may cause obstruction (see  intes-
tine, obstruction of). Bezoars can be
removed endoscopically or surgically.
bi- The prefix meaning 2 or twice, as in
bilateral (2-sided).
bicarbonate of soda See  sodium bi-
carbonate.
biceps muscle The name given to a
muscle originating as 2 separate parts,
which then fuse. It is the commonly
used name for the biceps brachii mus-
cle of the upper arm, which bends 
the arm at the elbow and rotates the
forearm. The biceps femoris at the back
of the thigh bends the leg at the knee
and extends the thigh.
bicuspid A term meaning to have 2 cusps
(curved, pointed structures). Bicuspid
describes certain  heart valves and is
used as an alternative name for a pre-
molar tooth (see teeth).
bifocal A spectacle lens with 2 different
focal lengths. Glasses with bifocal len-
ses make corrections for both close and
distant vision.
bilateral A term that means affecting
both sides of the body, or affecting both
organs if they are paired (for example,
both ears in bilateral deafness).
bile A greenish-brown alkaline liquid
secreted by the  liver. Bile carries away
waste products formed in the liver and
also helps to break down fats in the
small intestine for digestion. 
The waste products in bile include the
pigments bilirubin and biliverdin, which
give bile its greenish-brown colour; bile
salts, which aid in the breakdown and
absorption of fats; and cholesterol. Bile
passes out of the liver through the bile
ducts  and is then concentrated and
stored in the gallbladder. After a meal,
bile is expelled and enters the duode-
num (the first section of the small
intestine) via the common bile duct.
Most of the bile salts are later reab-
sorbed into the bloodstream to be
recycled by the liver into bile. Bile pig-
ments are excreted in the faeces. (See
also biliary system; colestyramine.)
BILE BETAHISTINE
Biceps
Triceps
Humerus
Ulna
Radius
BICEPS MUSCLE
Two heads of biceps 
Bbile duct Any of the ducts by which bile
is carried from the liver, first to the gall-
bladder and then to the duodenum (the
first section of the small intestine). The
bile duct system forms a network of
tubular canals. Canaliculi (small canals)
surround the liver cells and collect the
bile. The canaliculi join together to
form ducts of increasing size. The ducts
emerge from the liver as the 2 hepatic
ducts, which join within or just outside
the liver to form the common hepatic
duct. The cystic duct branches off to the
gallbladder; from this point the com-
mon hepatic duct becomes the common
bile duct and leads into the duodenum.
(See also biliary system.)
bile duct cancer See cholangiocarcinoma.
bile duct obstruction A blockage or
constriction of a bile duct (see  biliary
system). Bile duct obstruction results in
accumulation of bile in the liver (choles-
tasis) and  jaundice due to a buildup 
of  bilirubin in the blood. Prolonged
obstruction of the bile duct can lead 
to secondary biliary cirrhosis. The most
common cause of obstruction is  gall-
stones. Other causes include a tumour
affecting the pancreas (see  pancreas,
cancer of), where the bile duct passes
through it, or cancer that has spread
from elsewhere in the body. Cholangio-
carcinoma (cancer of the bile ducts) is a
very rare cause of blockage. Bile duct
72
BILE DUCT BILIARY CIRRHOSIS
B
Liver Pancreas
Stomach
DETAIL
Cystic duct
BILE DUCT
Common hepatic duct
Gallbladder
LOCATION
Common 
bile duct
Duodenum
obstruction is a rare side effect of cer-
tain drugs. It may also be caused by
cholangitis (inflammation of the bile
ducts), trauma (such as injury during
surgery), and rarely by flukes or worms.
Bile duct obstruction causes ※obstruc-
tive§ jaundice, which is characterized by
pale-coloured faeces, dark urine, and a
yellow skin colour. There may also be
itching. Other symptoms may include
abdominal pain (with gallstones) or
weight loss (with cancer). Treatment de-
pends on the cause, but surgery may be
necessary. Gallstones may be removed
with an endoscope (see ERCP).
bilharzia Another name for the tropical
parasitic disease schistosomiasis.
biliary atresia A rare disorder, present
from birth, in which some or all of the
bile ducts fail to develop or have devel-
oped abnormally. As a result,  bile is
unable to drain from the liver (see chole-
stasis). Unless the atresia can be treated,
secondary  biliary cirrhosis will develop
and may prove fatal. Symptoms include
deepening jaundice, usually beginning a
week after birth, and the passing of dark
urine and pale faeces. Treatment is by
surgery to bypass the ducts. If this fails,
or if the jaundice recurs, a  liver trans-
plant is the only possible treatment.
biliary cirrhosis An uncommon formof
liver  cirrhosis that results from prob-
lems with the bile ducts, either due to
an  autoimmune disorder known as pri-
mary biliary cirrhosis, or a longstanding
blockage. Primary biliary cirrhosis affects
mainly middle-aged women and seems
to be linked with a malfunction of the
immune system. Secondary biliary cir-
rhosis results from prolonged  bile duct
obstruction or  biliary atresia. In both
types, liver function is impaired due to
cholestasis (accumulation of bile in the
liver). In primary biliary cirrhosis, the bile
ducts within the liver become inflamed
and are destroyed. Symptoms include
itching,  jaundice, an enlarged liver, and
sometimes abdominal pain, fatty diar-
rhoea, and xanthomatosis. Osteoporosis
may develop. Symptoms of liver cirrhosis
and  liver failure may occur after several
years. Drugs can minimize complications
and relieve symptoms such as itching. A
liver transplant is the only long-term cure.73
The symptoms and signs of secondary
biliary cirrhosis include abdominal pain
and tenderness, liver enlargement, fev-
ers and chills, and sometimes blood
abnormalities. Treatment is the same as
for bile duct obstruction.
biliary colic A severe pain in the upper
right quadrant of the abdomen that is
usually caused by the gallbladder＊s
attempts to expel  gallstones or by the
movement of a stone in the bile ducts.
The pain may be felt in the right shoul-
der (see referred pain) or may penetrate
to the centre of the back. Episodes of
biliary colic often last for several hours
and may recur, particularly after meals.
Injections of an analgesic drug and an
antispasmodic drug may be given to
relieve the colic. Tests such as cholecys-
tography or  ultrasound scanning can
confirm the presence of gallstones, in
which case  cholecystectomy (surgical
removal of the gallbladder) is possible.
biliary system The organs and ducts by
which bile is formed, concentrated, and
carried from the  liver to the duodenum
(the first part of the small intestine).
Bile is secreted by the liver cells and
collected by a network of bile ducts that
carry the bile out of the liver by way of
the hepatic duct. A channel called the
cystic duct branches off the hepatic
duct and leads to the gallbladder where
bile is concentrated and stored. Beyond
this junction, the hepatic duct becomes
the common bile duct and opens into the
duodenum at a controlled orifice called
the ampulla of Vater. The presence of fat
in the duodenum after a meal causes
secretion of a hormone, which opens
the ampulla of Vater and makes the
gallbladder contract, squeezing stored
bile into the duodenum.
The main disorders affecting the bil-
iary system are  gallstones, congenital
biliary atresia and  bile duct obstruction.
(See also gallbladder, disorders of.)
biliousness A condition in which bile is
brought up to the mouth from the sto-
mach. It is also used as a nonmedical
term for nausea and vomiting.
bilirubin The main pigment found in
bile. It is produced by the breakdown of
haemoglobin, the pigment in red blood
cells. Excessively high levels of bilirubin
cause the yellow pigmentation associ-
ated with jaundice.
Billings＊ method Also called the mucus
inspection method, a technique in which
a woman notes changes in the character-
istics of mucus produced by the cervix
in order to predict ovulation for the pur-
poses of contraception or family planning.
Billroth＊s operation A type of partial
gastrectomy in which the lower part of
the stomach is removed. Once used as
a surgical treatment for peptic ulcers, it
has now largely been replaced by treat-
ment with antibiotic drugs.
Binet test The first intelligence test that
attempted to measure higher mental
functions, devised in 1905.
binge每purge syndrome An alterna-
tive term for bulimia.
bio- A prefix describing a relationship to
life, as in biology, the science of life.
bioavailability The proportion of a drug
that reaches the target organs and tis-
sues, usually expressed as a percentage
of the dose administered. Intravenous
administration results in 100 per cent
bioavailability because the drug is in-
jected directly into the bloodstream.
Drugs taken orally have a much lower
bioavailability. Preparations that have
equal bioavailabilities are described as
bioequivalent. (See also drug.)
biochemistry A science that studies
the chemistry of living organisms. It in-
cludes the chemical processes involved
in the maintenance and reproduction of
body cells and the chemical reactions
carried out inside cells that make up
the metabolism of the body. Overall reg-
ulation of these chemical processes is a
function of  hormones, whereas regula-
tion of individual reactions is carried
out by enzymes. A constant interchange
occurs between cell fluids and blood
and urine. Biochemists can therefore
learn about the chemical changes going
on inside cells from measurements of
the various minerals, gases, enzymes,
hormones, and proteins in blood, urine,
and other body fluids. Such tests are
used to make diagnoses and to screen
for a disease and to monitor its pro-
gress. The most common biochemical
tests are performed on blood, and they
include  liver function tests  and kidney
BIOCHEMISTRY BILIARY COLIC
Bfunction  tests. Biochemical tests can
also be performed on urine (see urinaly-
sis) and other body fluids.
bioengineering See biomechanical eng-
ineering.
biofeedback training A technique in
which a person uses information about a
normally unconscious body function to
gain conscious control over that func-
tion. Biofeedback training may help in the
treatment of stress-related conditions,
including certain types of hypertension,
anxiety, and migraine.
The patient is connected to a record-
ing instrument that measures one of
the unconscious body activities, such
as blood pressure, heart-rate, or the
quantity of sweat on the skin. The
patient receives information (feedback)
on the changing levels of these activi-
ties from changes in the instrument＊s
signals. Using relaxation techniques, the
patient learns to change the signals by
conscious control of the body function.
Once acquired, this control can be exer-
cised without the instrument.
biological clock A popular term for the
inherent timing mechanism that suppos-
edly controls physiological processes
and cycles in living organisms. (See
also biorhythms.)
biomechanical engineering A disci-
pline that applies engineering methods
and principles to the body to explain how
it functions and to treat disorders. Prac-
tical applications include the design of
74
artificial joints and heart valves, plaster
casts, and kidney dialysis machines.
biopsy A diagnostic test in which a
small amount of tissue or cells are
removed from the body for microscopic
examination. It is an accurate method
of diagnosing many illnesses, including
cancer. Microscopic examination of tis-
sue (histology) or of cells (cytology)
usually gives a correct diagnosis.
There are several types of biopsy. In
excisional biopsy, the whole abnormal
area is removed for study. Incisional
biopsy involves cutting away a small
sample of skin or muscle for analysis. In
a needle biopsy, a needle is inserted
through the skin and into the organ or
tumour to be investigated. Aspiration
biopsy uses a needle and syringe to
remove cells from a solid lump. Guided
biopsy uses  ultrasound scanning or  CT
scanning to locate the area of tissue to
be biopsied and to follow the progress
of the needle. In endoscopic biopsy, an
endoscope is passed into the organ to
be investigated and an attachment is
used to take a sample from the lining of
accessible hollow organs and struc-
tures, such as the lungs, stomach,
colon, and bladder. In an open biopsy,
a surgeon opens a body cavity to reveal a
diseased organ or tumour and removes
a sample of tissue. Prompt analysis, in
some cases by  frozen section, can
enable the surgeon to decide whether
to remove the entire diseased area
immediately. 
Biopsy samples
are analysed by
staining, in which
dyes are used to
to show up struc-
tures or identify
constituents such
as  antibodies or
enzymes. A tissue
sample may be
tested with speci-
fic antibodies in
the investigation
of infection and
inflammation. In
some cases, a tis-
sue  culture may
be required.
BIOENGINEERING BIOPSY
B
Line of
incision
BIOPSY
EXCISIONAL SKIN
BIOPSY
Abnormal area
Normal
skin
Sensor measures
heart rate or
sweating 
Monitor displays
changes in body
activities such as
heart-rate
BIOFEEDBACK TRAINING75
biorhythms Physiological functions that
vary in a rhythmic way. Most biorhythms
are based on a daily, or circadian (24-
hour), cycle. Our bodies are governed
by an internal clock, which is itself regu-
lated by hormones. Periods of sleepiness
andwakefulness may be affected by the
level of melatonin secreted by the pineal
gland in the brain. Melatonin release is
stimulated by darkness and suppressed
by light. Cortisol, secreted by the ad-
renal glands, also reflects the sleeping
and waking states, being low in the
evening and high in the morning.
biotechnology The use of living organ-
isms such as  bacteria in industry and
science (for example, in drug production).
biotin A vitamin of the B complex (see
vitamin B complex) that is essential for
the breakdown of fats.
biphosphonate drugs See  bisphos-
phonate drugs.
bipolar disorder An illness, commonly
known as manic每depressive illness, char-
acterized by swings in mood between
the opposite extremes of severe depres-
sion and overexcitability.
birth See childbirth.
birth canal The passage through the pel-
vis from the cervix (neck of the womb)
to the vaginal opening through which
the baby passes during childbirth. 
birth control Limitation of the number
of children born, either to an individual
or within a population. Family planning
allows men and women to choose if
and when to have children;  contracep-
tion can prevent unwanted pregnancies.
birth defects Abnormalities that are
obvious at birth or detectable early in
infancy. Also called congenital defects,
they encompass both minor abnormali-
ties, such as  birthmarks, and serious
disorders such as spina bifida.
Causes include chromosomal abnormal-
ities, genetic defects, drugs taken during
pregnancy, exposure to radiation, and
infections. In some cases, the cause of a
defect is unknown. Defects that are due
to chromosomal abnormalities include
Down＊s syndrome. Some defects, such
as achondroplasia and albinism, are usu-
ally inherited from 1 or both parents
(see  gene;  genetic disorders). Certain
drugs and chemicals (called teratogens)
can damage the fetus if the mother
takes or is exposed to them during early
pregnancy. Teratogenic drugs include
thalidomide (now rarely prescribed) and
isotretinoin, which is used in the treat-
ment of severe acne. Alcohol can affect
the development of the brain and face
(see fetal alcohol syndrome). 
Irradiation of the embryo in early preg-
nancy can cause abnormalities. Very
small doses of radiation increase the
child＊s risk of developing leukaemia later
in life (see radiation hazards).
Certain illnesses, such as rubella (Ger-
man measles) and  toxoplasmosis, can
cause birth defects if they are contrac-
ted during pregnancy. 
Brain and spinal cord abnormalities,
such as spina bifida and hydrocephalus,
and congenital heart disorders (see
heart disease, congenital) result from
interference with the development of
particular groups of cells. Other com-
mon defects include cleft lip and palate.
Ultrasound scanning and blood tests
during pregnancy can identify women at
high risk of having a baby with a birth
defect. Further tests such as chorionic
villus sampling,  amniocentesis, or  fetos-
copy may then be carried out.
birth injury Damage sustained during
birth. Minor injuries, such as bruising
and swelling of the scalp during a vagi-
nal delivery (see cephalhaematoma) are
common. More serious injury can occur,
particularly if the baby is excessively
large and has difficulty in passing
through the birth canal. A breech deliv-
ery may result in injury to nerves in the
shoulder, causing temporary paralysis
in the arm. The face may be paralysed
temporarily if the facial nerve is trauma-
tized by forceps. Fractured bones are
another hazard of difficult deliveries,
but the bones usually heal easily. (See
also birth defects; brain damage.)
birthmark An area of discoloured skin
present from birth, or very soon after-
wards, such as moles, freckles, and other
types of melanocytic naevus (various flat,
brown to blue-grey skin patches), straw-
berry marks, and port-wine stains. The
last 2 are types of  haemangioma (mal-
formation of blood vessels). Strawberry
marks often increase in size in the first
BIRTHMARK BIORHYTHMS
B76
year, but most disappear after the age
of 9 years. Port-wine stains seldom
fade, but  laser treatment  performed in
adulthood can make some of them fade.
birthpool A pool of warm water in
which a woman can sit to help relieve
pain during labour.
birth rate A measurement of the num-
ber of births in a year in relation to 
the population.
birthweight A baby＊s weight at birth
that usually ranges from 2.5每4.5kg.
Birthweight depends on a number of
factors, including the size and ethnic
origin of the parents. Babies who weigh
less than 2.5kg at birth are classified as
being of low birthweight. Causes of low
birthweight include  prematurity and
undernourishment in the uterus (for
example, because the mother had pre-
eclampsia). Abnormally high birthweight
is often due to unrecognized or poorly
controlled diabetes mellitus in the mother.
bisexuality Sexual interest in members
of both sexes that may or may not in-
volve sexual activity. 
bismuth A metal, salts of which are used
in tablets to treat  peptic ulcer and in
suppositories and creams to treat haem-
orrhoids. Bismuth preparations taken
by mouth may colour the faeces black.
The tongue may darken and occasional
nausea and vomiting may occur. 
bisphosphonate drugs Drugs used to
slow bone metabolism (for example in
Paget's disease) and to reduce the high
calcium levels in the blood associated
with destruction of bone by secondary
cancer growths. Bisphosphonates are
also used in the prevention or treat-
ment of osteoporosis.
bite See occlusion.
bites, animal Any injury inflicted by
the mouthparts of an animal, from the
puncture wounds of bloodsucking in-
sects to the massive injuries caused by
shark or crocodile attacks. Teeth, espe-
cially those of carnivores, can inflict
severe and widespread mechanical inj-
ury. Severe injuries and lacerations to
major blood vessels can lead to severe
blood loss and physiological shock. Ser-
ious infection may occur due to bacteria
in the animal＊s mouth; and  tetanus is a
particular hazard. In countries where
rabies is present, any mammal may po-
tentially harbour the rabies virus and
transmit it via a bite. Medical advice
should be sought for all but minor inj-
uries or if there is a possibility of rabies.
Treatment usually includes cleaning and
examination of the wound. The wound
will usually be left open and dressed.
Preventive antibioticdrug treatment and
an antitetanus injection may also be
given. Antirabies vaccine is given, with
immunoglobulin, if there is any possibil-
ity that the animal is infected with the
rabies virus. (See also  bites, human
insect bites;  snake bites;  spider bites;
venomous bites and stings.)
bites, human Wounds caused by one
person biting another. Human bites
rarely cause serious tissue damage or
blood loss, but infection is likely, partic-
ularly if the bite is deep. There is a risk
of  tetanus infection. Transmission of
hepatitis B, herpes simplex, and AIDS by
a bite is a theoretical hazard.
black death The medieval name for
bubonic plague, which killed 50per cent
of its victims. One feature of the disease
is bleeding beneath the skin, causing
dark blue or black bruises, hence the
name ＆black death＊. 
black eye The bruised appearance of
the skin around the eye, usually follow-
ing an injury. The discoloration is due
to blood collecting under the skin.
blackhead A semi-solid, black-capped
plug of greasy material, also known as a
comedo, blocking the outlet of a seba-
ceous (oil-forming) gland in the skin.
Blackheads occur most commonly on
the face, chest, shoulders, and back and
are associated with increased seba-
ceous gland activity. They are one of the
features of most types of acne.
blackout A common term for loss of
consciousness (see fainting).
black teeth See discoloured teeth.
blackwater fever An occasional and
life-threatening complication of falci-
parum  malaria  (the most dangerous
form of malaria). Symptoms include
loss of consciousness, fever, and vomit-
ing, and very dark urine (due to pigment
from destroyed red blood cells being fil-
tered into the urine), which gives the
condition its name.
BIRTHPOOL BLACKWATER FEVER
B77
bladder The hollow, muscular organ in
the lower abdomen that acts as a reser-
voir for  urine. It lies within, and is
protected by, the pelvis. An adult blad-
der can hold about 0.5litres of urine
before the need to pass urine is felt.
The bladder walls consist of muscle
and an inner lining. Two ureters carry
urine to the bladder from the kidneys.
At the lowest point of the bladder is the
opening into the urethra, which is known
as the bladder neck. This is normally
kept tightly closed by a ring of muscle
(the urethral sphincter). The function of
the bladder is to collect and store urine
until it can be expelled. Defective blad-
der function, leading to problems such
as  incontinence and  urinary retention,
can have a variety of causes. (See also
bladder, disorders of; enuresis).
bladder cancer See bladder tumours.
bladder, disorders of A group of dis-
orders affecting the bladder, including
inflammation (cystitis) usually caused
by a bacterial infection; calculi (stones);
impairment of the nerve supply; and
tumours. In men, obstruction to urine
flow from the bladder by an enlarged
prostate gland may cause urinary reten-
tion. Tumours of, or injury to, the spinal
cord may affect the nerves controlling
the bladder, leading either to retention
or  incontinence. Bladder stones are
caused by the precipitation of substan-
ces that are present in the urine. Injury
to the bladder is uncommon but may
occur if the pelvis is fractured when the
bladder is full.
Disturbed bladder control can also
result from nerve degeneration in condi-
tions such as diabetes mellitus, multiple
sclerosis, or  dementia. An unstable or
irritable bladder is a common condition
and is sometimes associated with a uri-
nary tract infection or prolapse of the
uterus. Tension or anxiety can cause fre-
quent urination. In children, delayed
bladder control (see  enuresis) most
often results from delayed maturation
of the nervous system.
bladder tumours Growths originating
in the inner lining of the bladder. Many
are papillomas (small wart-like growths),
which tend to recur and will eventually
become cancerous. Other, more malig-
nant, growths may extend not only into
the bladder cavity but may also spread
through the bladder wall to involve
nearby organs such as the colon, rec-
tum, prostate gland, or uterus. 
Bladder cancer is more common in
smokers and workers in the dye and
rubber industries. Haematuria (blood in
the urine) is the main symptom of blad-
der cancer. A tumour may obstruct the
entry of a ureter into the bladder, caus-
ing back pressure and pain in the
kidney region, or may obstruct the ure-
thral exit, causing difficulty in passing,
or retention of, urine. 
Bladder tumours are diagnosed using
cystoscopy and biopsy of the abnormal
area. If small, they can be treated by
heat or surgically during cystoscopy.
They tend to recur at the same or other
sites within the bladder, so that regular
BLADDER TUMOURS BLADDER
B
BLADDER
Bladder
Vagina 
Ureter
Rectum
Rectum Uterus
MALE FEMALE 
Bladder
Penis
Pelvic
cartilage
Urethra
Ureter
Prostate
gland
Scrotum
Urethra
Pelvic
cartilage78
follow-up cystoscopy is needed. Blad-
der tumours that have spread through
the bladder wall may be treated by
radiotherapy or by surgical removal of
part or all of the bladder.
blastocyst A cell cluster that develops
from a fertilized  ovum and grows into
an embryo (see fertilization).
blastomycosis A type of  fungal infec-
tion that can affect the lungs and other
internal organs.
bleaching, dental A cosmetic proce-
dure for lightening certain types of
discoloured teeth, including nonvital
＆dead＊ teeth. The surface of the affected
tooth is painted with oxidizing agents
and then exposed to ultraviolet light.
bleeding Loss of blood from the circu-
latory system caused by damage to the
blood vessels or by a bleeding disorder.
Bleeding may be visible (external) or
concealed (internal). Rapid loss of more
than 10per cent of the blood volume
can cause symptoms of  shock, with
fainting, pallor, and sweating.
The speed with which blood flows
from a cut depends on the type of blood
vessel damaged: blood usually oozes
from a capillary, flows from a vein, and
spurts from an artery. If an injury does
not break open the skin, blood collects
around the damaged blood vessels
close under the skin to form a bruise.
Any lost blood that mixes with other
body fluids such as sputum (phlegm) or
urine will be noticed quite readily; bleed-
ing in the digestive tract may make
vomit or faeces appear darker than
usual. Internal bleeding may not be dis-
covered until severe anaemia develops.
bleeding disorders A group of condi-
tions characterized by bleeding in the
absence of injury or by abnormally pro-
longed and excessive bleeding after
injury. The disorders result from defects
in mechanisms by which bleeding is
normally stopped: blood coagulation,
plugging of damaged blood vessels by
platelets, and constriction of blood ves-
sels (see blood clotting).
Coagulation disorders are usually due
a deficiency of or abnormality in the
enzymes (coagulation factors) involved
in blood clotting. Defects may be  con-
genital or acquired later in life. The
main congenital coagulation defects are
von Willebrand＊s disease, haemophilia,
and Christmas disease.
Acquired defects of coagulation factors
may develop at any age due to severe
liver disease, digestive system disorders
that prevent the absorption of vitamin K
(needed to make certain coagulation fac-
tors), or the use of anticoagulant drugs.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC) is an acquired disorder that is
both complex and serious. It may be the
result of underlying infection or cancer.
In this condition, platelets accumulate
and clots form within small blood ves-
sels; coagulation factors are used up
faster than they can be replaced, and
severe bleeding may result. 
Coagulation disorders are treated by
replacement of the missing factor, fac-
tors extracted from fresh blood, or fresh
frozen plasma. Genetically engineered
factors may be used. Anticoagulants are
sometimes used to suppress excess
clotting activity in DIC.
Thrombocytopenia, which results from
insufficient platelets in the blood, pro-
duces surface bleeding into the skin
and gums and multiple small bruises.
Platelet defects may be inherited, asso-
ciated with the use of certain drugs
(including aspirin), or a complication of
certain bone marrow disorders such as
myeloid  leukaemia. Treatment consists
of platelet transfusions. Rarely, abnor-
mal bleeding is caused by a blood-
vessel defect or scurvy. Elderly people
and patients on long-term courses of
corticosteroid drugs may suffer mild
abnormal bruising due to loss of skin
support to the smallest blood vessels.
Treatment is rarely required.
bleeding gums See gingivitis.
blepharitis Inflammation of the eyelids,
with redness, irritation, and scaly skin at
the lid margins. Blepharitis may cause
burning and discomfort in the eyes and
flakes or crusts on the lashes. The con-
dition is common, tends to recur, and is
sometimes associated with dandruff of
the scalp or eczema. Severe blepharitis
may lead to  corneal ulcers. In many
cases, treatment of associated dandruff
with an antifungal shampoo will result
in improvement of the blepharitis.
BLASTOCYST BLEPHARITIS
B79
blepharoplasty A cosmetic operation
to remove wrinkled, drooping skin from
the upper and/or lower eyelids.
blepharospasm Prolonged, involuntary,
contraction of one of the muscles con-
trolling the eyelids, causing them to
close. It may be due to  photophobia,
damage to the  cornea, or  dystonia, for
which  botulinum toxin (a muscle relax-
ant) treatment is highly effective.
blind loop syndrome A condition in
which a redundant area or dead end
(blind loop) in the small intestine
becomes colonized with bacteria. This
results in abnormal faeces and poor
absorption of nutrients. The syndrome
may result from surgery or a  stricture
(narrowing) in the intestine due to a
disorder such as  Crohn＊s disease. It is
characterized by  steatorrhoea (pale yel-
low, foul-smelling, fatty, bulky faeces
that are difficult to flush away), tired-
ness, and weight loss.  Antibioticdrug
treatment usually cures the condition.
blindness Inability to see. Definitions
of blindness and partial sight vary. In
the UK, blindness is defined as a cor-
rected visual acuity of 3/60 or less in the
better eye, or a  visual field of no more
than 20degrees in the better eye. Blind-
ness may result from injury to, or
disease or degeneration of, the eyeball;
the optic nerve or nerve pathways con-
necting the eye to the brain; or the
brain itself. Clouding of the cornea may
result from Sj?gren＊s syndrome, vitamin
A deficiency, chemical damage, infec-
tions, and injury.  Corneal ulcers can
cause blindness due to scarring of the
cornea.  Uveitis and  cataracts are other
common causes of blindness. Diabetes
mellitus,  hypertension, or injury can all
cause bleeding into the cavity of the
eyeball and subsequent loss of vision.
Bleeding into the fluid in front of the
lens (hyphaema) or behind the lens
(vitreous haemorrhage) can also result
in loss of vision. Other conditions that
may cause blindness include glaucoma;
retinal artery occlusion or  retinal vein
occlusion; age-related macular degener-
ation;  retinopathy;  retinal detachment;
tumours such as  retinoblastoma and
malignant  melanoma of the eye; and
retinal haemorrhage. 
Loss of vision may be due to nerve con-
duction problems. These problems may
be the result of pressure caused by a
tumour; reduced blood supply to the
optic nerve;  optic neuritis; or toxic or
nutritional deficiencies. Blindness can
result if there is pressure on the visual
cortex from a  brain tumour or  brain
haemorrhage, or if the blood supply to
the cortex is reduced following a stroke.
Treatment depends on the underlying
cause. If the loss of vision cannot be
corrected, the patient may then be reg-
istered as legally blind or partially
sighted. (See also eye; vision, loss of.)
blind spot The small, oval-shaped area
on the retina of the eye where the optic
nerve leaves the eyeball. The area is not
sensitive to light because it has no light
receptors (nerve endings responsive to
light). The blind spot can also be used
to describe the part of the visual field in
which objects cannot be detected.
blister A collection of fluid beneath the
outer layer of the skin that forms a
raised area. A blister contains fluid that
has leaked from blood vessels in under-
lying skin layers after minor damage
and protects the damaged tissue. Com-
mon causes are  burns and friction.
Blisters may also occur with pemphigus,
pemphigoid,  dermatitis herpetiformis,
some types of porphyria, and some skin
diseases. These include eczema, epider-
molysis bullosa, impetigo, and erythema
multiforme.  Small blisters develop in
the viral infections  chickenpox,  herpes
zoster (shingles), and  herpes simplex.
Generally, blisters are best left intact,
but large or unexplained blisters need
medical attention.
bloating Distension of the abdomen,
commonly due to wind in the stomach
or intestine (see abdominal swelling).
blocked nose See  nasal congestion;
nasal obstruction.
blocking Inability to express true feel-
ings or thoughts, usually as a result of
emotional or mental conflict. In Freudi-
an- based psychotherapies, blocking is
regarded as originating from repression
of painful emotions in early life. A very
specific form of thought blocking occurs
in  schizophrenia: trains of thought are
persistently interrupted involuntarily to
BLOCKING BLEPHAROPLASTY
B80
be replaced by unrelated new ones.
(See also psychotherapy.)
blood The red fluid that circulates in the
body＊s veins, arteries, and capillaries.
Blood is pumped by the heart via the
arteries to the lungs and all other tis-
sues and is then returned to the heart
in veins (see  circulatory system). Blood
is the body＊s transport system and plays
an important role in the defence against
infection. An average adult has about 
5 litres of blood. 
Almost half of the volume of blood
consists of blood cells; these include red
blood cells (erythrocytes), which carry
oxygen to tissues; white blood cells
(leukocytes), which fight infection; and
platelets (thrombocytes), which are in-
volved in blood clotting. The remainder
of the blood volume is a watery, straw-
coloured fluid called plasma, which
contains dissolved proteins, sugars,
fats, salts, and minerals. Nutrients are
transported in the blood to the tissues
after absorption from the intestinal
tract or after release from storage
depots such as the liver. Waste prod-
ucts, including  urea and  bilirubin are
carried in the plasma to the kidneys and
liver respectively. 
Plasma proteins include fibrinogen;
which is involved in blood clotting;  im-
munoglobulins (also called  antibodies)
and  complement, which are part of the
immune system; and albumin. Hormones
are also transported in the blood to
their target organs. 
blood cells Cells, also called blood cor-
puscles, present in blood for most or
part of their lifespan. They include red
blood cells, which make up about 45
per cent by volume of normal blood,
white blood cells, and  platelets. Blood
cells are made in the bone marrow by a
series of divisions from stem cells.
Red blood cells (also known as RBCs,
red blood corpuscles, or erythrocytes)
transport oxygen from the lungs to 
the tissues (see  respiration). Each RBC
is packed with  haemoglobin,  enzymes,
minerals, and sugars. Abnormalities can
occur in the rate at which RBCs are
either produced or destroyed, in their
numbers, and in their shape, size, and
haemoglobin content, causing forms of
anaemia and  polycythaemia (see  blood,
disorders of).
White blood cells (also called WBCs,
white blood corpuscles, or leukocytes)
protect the body against infection and
fight infection when it occurs. The 3
main types of WBC are granulocytes
(also called polymorphonuclear leuko-
cytes), monocytes, and  lymphocytes.
Granulocytes are further classified as
neutrophils, eosinophils, or basophils,
and each type of granulocyte has a role
in either fighting infection or in inflam-
matory or allergic reactions. Monocytes
and lymphocytes also play an important
part in the  immune system. Lympho-
cytes are usually formed in the lymph
nodes. One type, a T-lymphocyte,is re-
sponsible for the
delayed hypersen-
sitivity reactions
(see  allergy) and
is also involved in
protection against
cancer. T-lympho-
cytes manufacture
chemicals, known
as lymphokines,
which affect the
function of other
cells. In addition,
the T-cells mod-
erate the activity
of B-lymphocytes,
which form the
antibodies that can
prevent a second
attack of certain infectious diseases.
Platelets (also known as thrombocytes),
are the smallest blood cells and are
important in blood clotting.
The numbers, shapes, and appearance
of the various types of blood cell are of
great value in the diagnosis of disease
(see blood count; blood film).
blood clotting The process of blood
solidification. Clotting is important in
stemming bleeding from damaged blood
vessels. However, unwanted blood clot-
ting can occur inside major blood vessels
and cause a myocardial infarction (heart
attack) or stroke (see thrombosis). 
When a blood vessel is damaged, it
constricts immediately to reduce blood
flow to the area. The damage sets off a
BLOOD BLOOD CLOTTING
B
White
blood cell
(neutrophil)
White 
blood cell
(lymphocyte)
Red blood
cell
Plasma
Platelet
BLOOD CELLSblood count A test, also called full
blood count, that measures  haemoglo-
bin concentration and the numbers of
red blood cells, white blood cells, and
platelets in 1 cu. mm of blood. The pro-
portion of various white blood cells is
measured and the size and shape of red
and white cells is noted. It is the most
commonly performed blood test and is
important for diagnosing  anaemia or
confirming the presence of an infection
to which the blood has responded. It is
also used to diagnose disorders such as
leukaemia and thrombocytopenia.
blood culture See culture.
blood, disordersof Disorders result-
ing from abnormalities in any of the
components of blood or from infection.
Disorders include types of  anaemia,
polycythaemia,  bleeding disorders, and
unwanted clot formation (thrombosis),
hypoalbuminaemia (albumin deficiency)
and agammaglobulinaemia (deficiency
of  gamma-globulin). Blood disorders
such as sickle cell anaemia, thalassaemia,
and  haemophilia are inherited. Bone
marrow cancers that affect production
of blood components include leukaemia,
polycythaemia vera, and multiple myelo-
ma. Blood poisoning is usually due to
septicaemia or a toxin such as carbon
monoxide. Some drugs can cause blood
abnormalities as a side effect. (See also
anaemia, haemolytic; anaemia, iron-defi-
ciency;  anaemia, megaloblastic; malaria;
hyperbilirubinaemia.)
blood donation The process of giving
blood for use in  blood transfusion.
series of chemical reactions that lead to
the formation of a clot to seal the
injury. First,  platelets around the injury
site are activated, becoming sticky and
adhering to the blood-vessel wall. Then,
the activated platelets release chemi-
cals, which, in turn, activate blood
clotting factors. These factors, together
with vitamin K, act on  fibrinogen and
convert it to  fibrin. Strands of fibrin
form a meshwork, which traps red blood
cells to form a clot. 
There are several anticlotting mecha-
nisms to prevent the formation of
unwanted clots. These include prosta-
cyclin (a prostaglandin), which prevents
platelet aggregation, and plasmin, which
breaks down fibrin (see  fibrinolysis).
Blood flow washes away active coagula-
tion factors; and the liver deactivates
excess coagulation factors.
Defects in blood clotting may result in
bleeding disorders. Excessive clotting
(thrombosis) may be due to an inherited
increase or defect in a coagulation factor
(see factor V), the use of oral contracep-
tives, a decrease in the level of enzymes
that inhibit coagulation, or sluggish
blood flow through a particular area.
Treatment is usually with  anticoagulant
drugs such as heparin or warfarin.
blood-clotting tests Tests to screen
for and diagnose  bleeding disorders,
usually resulting from deficiencies or
abnormalities of blood coagulation fac-
tors or of platelets (see blood clotting).
Tests are also used to monitor treat-
ment with anticoagulant drugs.
BLOOD CLOTTING
81
BLOOD DONATION BLOOD-CLOTTING TESTS
B Site of
injury
Red blood
cell
BLOOD CLOT FORMS PLATELETS ACTIVATED
Blood vessel
constricts Platelet
Trapped red
blood cell
Fibrin
meshwork PlateletDonated blood is tested for a range of
infectious agents such as  hepatitis B
and  hepatitis C and antibodies to HIV.
After being classified into blood groups,
the blood is stored in a blood bank,
either whole or separated into its differ-
ent components (see  blood products).
Apheresis is a type of blood donation in
which only a specific blood component,
such as plasma, platelets, or white
cells, is withdrawn from the donor. 
blood film A test that involves smear-
ing a drop of blood on to a glass slide
for examination under a microscope.
The blood film is stained with dyes to
make the blood cells show up clearly.
The test allows the shape and appear-
ance of blood cells to be checked for
any abnormality, such as the sickle-
shaped red blood cells characteristic of
sickle cell anaemia. The relative propor-
tions of the different types of white
blood cells can also be counted. This
examination, called a differential white
cell count, may be helpful in diagnosing
infection or  leukaemia. Blood films are
also used in diagnosing infections, such
as malaria, in which the parasites can
be seen inside the red blood cells.
Blood films are usually carried out
together with a full blood count.
blood gases A test for determining the
acidity每alkalinity (pH) and the concen-
trations of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and
bicarbonate in the blood. The test is
carried out on a sample of blood taken
from an artery, usually at the wrist or
groin. It is useful in diagnosing and mon-
itoring  respiratory failure. Bicarbonate
and acidity reflect the acid每base balance
of the body, which may be disturbed in
conditions such as diabetic ketoacido-
sis, aspirin poisoning, hyperventilation,
or repeated vomiting. Blood oxygen can
also be measured without taking a
blood sample by using an oximeter.
blood glucose  The level of  glucose in
the blood. Abnormally high blood glu-
cose (sometimes called sugar) levels are
an indication of  diabetes mellitus. (See
also hyperglycaemia; hypoglycaemia.)
blood groups Systems of classifying
blood according to the different marker
proteins (antigens) on the surface of red
blood cells and antibodies in the plas-
ma. These antigens affect the ability of
the red blood cells to provoke an
immune response. There are 2 main
blood grouping systems: the ABO sys-
tem and the rhesus system. 
In the ABOsystem, the presence or
absence of 2 types of antigen (named A
and B) on the surface of the red blood
cells determine whether a person＊s
blood group is A, B, AB (which has both
A and B), or O (which has neither A nor
B). People with the A antigen (group A)
have anti-B antibodies; people with the
B antigen (group B) have anti-A anti-
bodies; those with both antigens (blood
group AB) have neither; and those with
neither antigen (group O) have both.
The rhesus system involves several
antigens, the most important of which
is factor D. People with this factor are Rh
positive; those without it are Rh neg-
ative. The importance of the Rh group
relates mainly to pregnancy in Rh- 
negative women, since, if the baby 
is Rh positive, the mother may form
antibodies against the baby＊s blood
(see rhesus incompatibility). 
BLOOD FILM BLOOD GROUPS
B
BLOOD GROUP AB
BLOOD GROUPS
B antigen 
Anti-B
antibody Anti-A antibody
Anti-A
antibody
B antigen 
A antigen
A antigen 
Anti-B
antibody
BLOOD GROUP O BLOOD GROUP ABLOOD GROUP B
Red blood 
cell
82white blood cells and/or plasma pro-
teins removed) are used when a person
needs repeated transfusions because
there is less risk of an allergy to any of
the blood components developing. 
Platelets may be given in transfusions
for people with blood-clotting disor-
ders. Patients who have life-threatening
infections may be treated with granulo-
cytes, a type of white blood cell. Fresh
frozen plasma is used to correct many
types of  bleeding disorder because it
contains all the clotting factors.  Albu-
min, prepared from the plasma of whole
blood, is used mainly to treat  shock
resulting from severe blood loss until
compatible whole blood becomes avail-
able. Purified albumin preparations are
used to treat  nephrotic syndrome and
chronic liver disease.
Concentrates of blood clotting factors
VIII and IX are used in the treatment 
of  haemophilia and  Christmas disease.
Immunoglobulins (also called antibod-
ies), which are extracted from blood
plasma, can be given by injection (see
immunoglobulin injection) to protect
people who are unable to produce their
own antibodies or have already been
exposed to an infectious agent, or to
provide short-term protection against
hepatitis A. Immunoglobulins are given
in large doses to treat certain  autoim-
mune disorders.
blood smear See blood film.
blood sugar See blood glucose.
blood tests Analysis of a sample of
blood to give information on its cells
and proteins and any of the chemicals,
antigens, antibodies, and gases that it
carries. Such tests can be used to check
on the health of major organs, as well
as on respiratory function, hormonal
balance, the immune system, and metab-
olism. Blood tests may look at numbers,
shape, size, and appearance of blood
cells and assess the function of clotting
factors. The most important tests are
blood count and  blood group tests if
transfusion is needed. Biochemical
tests measure chemicals in the blood
(see  acid每base balance;  kidney function
tests;  liver function tests). Microbiologi-
cal tests (see  immunoassay) look for
microorganisms that are in the blood, as
83
A person＊s blood group is inherited and
may be used in paternity testing. Gen-
etic analysis allows identification of the
blood of a criminal suspect with virtual
certainty (see genetic fingerprinting).
blood level The concentration of a given
substance in the blood plasma or serum
that may be measured by blood tests.
blood poisoning A common name for
septicaemia with  toxaemia, a life-threat-
ening illness caused by multiplication
of bacteria and formation of toxins in
the bloodstream. Septicaemia may be a
complication of an infection in an organ
or tissue. In some infective conditions,
septic shock may be caused by toxins
released by bacteria. Treatment is with
antibiotic drugs  and intensive therapy
for shock. (See also bacteraemia.)
blood pressure The pressure exerted
by the flow of blood through the main
arteries. The pressure at 2 different
phases is measured. Systolic, the higher
pressure, is created by the contraction
of the heart. Diastolic, the lower, is rec-
orded during relaxation of the ventricles
between heartbeats; it reflects the resis-
tance of all the small arteries in the body
and the load against which the heart
must work. The pressure wave that is
transmitted along the arteries with each
heartbeat is easily felt as the pulse.
Blood pressure is measured using a
sphygmomanometer and is expressed
as millimetres of mercury (mmHg).
Blood pressure varies with age, between
individuals, and at different times in the
same individual but a healthy young
adult usually has a blood pressure
reading, at rest, of about 120/80 (that is
120 mmHg systolic and 80mmHg dias-
tolic). Abnormally high blood pressure
is called  hypertension; abnormally low
pressure is termed hypotension.
blood products Donated blood that is
separated into its various components:
red cells, white cells, platelets, and
plasma (see  blood donation). Each
blood product has a specific lifespan
and use in blood transfusion. Packed red
cells (blood with most of the plasma
removed) are used to treat patients
with some forms of chronic  anaemia
and babies with  haemolytic disease of
the newborn. Washed red cells (with
BLOOD TESTS BLOOD LEVEL
Bin septicaemia. Microbiology also looks
for antibodies in the blood, which may
confirm immunity to an infection.
blood transfusion The infusion of large
volumes of blood or  blood products
directly into the bloodstream to remedy
severe blood loss or to correct chronic
anaemia. In an exchange transfusion,
nearly all of the recipient＊s blood is
replaced by donor blood. Before a
transfusion, a sample of the recipient＊s
blood is taken to identify the  blood
groups, and it is matched with suitable
donor blood. The donor blood is trans-
fused into an arm vein through a plastic
cannula. Usually, each unit (about 500
ml) of blood is given over 1每4hours; in
an emergency, 500ml may be given in a
couple of minutes. The blood pressure,
temperature, and pulse are monitored
during the procedure.
If mismatched blood is accidentally
introduced into the circulation, anti-
bodies in the recipient＊s blood may cause
donor cells to burst, leading to shock or
kidney failure. Less severe reactions can
produce fever, chills, or a rash. Reactions
can also occur as a result of an allergy
to transfused blood components. All
blood used for transfusion is carefully
screened for a number of infectious
agents, including HIV (the AIDS virus)
and hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
In elderly or severely anaemic patients,
transfusion can overload the circulation,
leading to heart failure. In patients with
chronic anaemia who need regular trans-
fusion over many years, excess iron may
accumulate (haemosiderosis) and dam-
age organs such as the heart, liver, and
pancreas. Treatment with desferrioxamine
to remove excess iron may be needed.
blood transfusion, autologous The
use of a person＊s own blood, donated
earlier, for  blood transfusion. Autolo-
gous transfusion eliminates the slight
but serious risk of contracting a serious
infectious illness from contaminated
blood. There is no risk of a transfusion
reaction occurring as a result of incom-
patibility between donor and recipient
blood. Up to 3.5litres of blood can be
removed and stored in several sessions
at least 4days apart and up to 3days
before planned surgery. Blood may be
salvaged during surgery, filtered and
returned to the circulation, reducing the
need for transfusion of donated blood.
BLOOD TRANSFUSIONBLOOD TRANSFUSION, AUTOLOGOUS
B
Bag of blood
Flow-rate
control
Blood enters
vein through a
plastic cannula
Nurse
monitors
blood
pressure
BLOOD TRANSFUSION
Sphygmomanometer
Stethoscope
8485
blood vessels A general term given to
arteries, veins, and capillaries (see  cir-
culatorysystem).
blue baby An infant with a cyanotic (blu-
ish) complexion, especially of the lips
and tongue, caused by a relative lack of
oxygen in the blood. This is usually due
to a structural defect of the heart or the
major arteries leaving the heart. Such
defects may need to be corrected surgi-
cally (see heart disease, congenital).
blurred vision Indistinct or fuzzy visual
images. Blurred vision, which should not
be confused with  double vision (diplo-
pia), can occur in 1  eye or both, for
episodes of varying lengths of time, and
can develop gradually or suddenly. The
usual cause of longstanding blurred
vision is a refractive error such as astig-
matism (unequal curvature of the front
of the eye), hypermetropia (longsighted-
ness), or myopia (shortsightedness), all
of which can be corrected by glasses or
contact lenses. After the age of 40, pres-
byopia (reduced ability to focus on near
objects) becomes more common. 
Vision may also be impaired or blurred
as a result of damage, disease, or ab-
normalities of parts of the eye or its
connections to the brain. The most com-
moncauses of blurred vision as a result
of disease are cataract and retinopathy.
blushing Brief reddening of the face
and sometimes the neck caused by
widening of the blood vessels close to
the skin＊s surface. Blushing is usually an
involuntary reaction to embarrassment.
In some women, blushing is a feature of
the hot flushes, which occur during the
menopause. Flushing of the face occurs
in association with carcinoid syndrome.
BMI The abbreviation for  body mass
index.
body contour surgery Surgery per-
formed to remove excess fat, skin, or
both, from various parts of the body,
especially the abdomen, thighs, and
buttocks. Abdominal wall reduction,
also known as abdominoplasty, involves
removing excess skin and fat from the
abdomen. With all of these procedures
there is a risk of complications, and the
wound may become infected. 
In suction lipectomy (liposuction), a
rigid hollow tube is inserted through
a small skin incision and use to break
up large areas of fat, which can then be
sucked out through the instrument.
Minor irregularities and dimpling of the
skin commonly occur after surgery. 
body dysmorphic disorder A psychi-
atric disorder in which a person suffers
intense anxiety about an imagined
defect in part of his or her body.
body image A person＊s perception of
the different parts of his or her own body.
body mass index (BMI) An indicator
of healthy body weight. BMI is calcula-
ted by dividing the weight in kilograms
by the square of the height in metres.
The normal range is 20每25.
body odour The smell caused by the
action of  bacteria on sweat. It is most
noticeable in the armpits and around
the genital area, where the  apocrine
glands contain proteins and fatty mater-
ials favourable to bacterial growth.
boil An inflamed, pus-filled area of skin,
usually an infected hair follicle. A more
severe and extensive form of a boil that
involves several hair follicles is a  car-
buncle. The usual cause of a boil is
infection with the bacterium  STAPHYLO-
COCCUS AUREUS. Recurrent boils may
occur in people with known or unrecog-
nized  diabetes mellitus  or with other
conditions in which general resistance
to infection is impaired. Treatment may
be with  antibiotic drugs but, if pus is
released surgically, the boil will usually
heal without antibiotics.
bolus A soft mass of chewed food that
is produced by the action of the tongue,
teeth, and saliva. The term bolus is also
used to describe a single dose of a drug
that is rapidly injected into a vein. 
bonding The process by which a strong
tie, both psychological and emotional,
is established between a parent and
newborn child.
bonding, dental Dental techniques that
use plastic resins and acrylic or porcelain
veneers to repair, restore, or improve
the appearance of damaged or defective
teeth. It is sometimes used as an alter-
native to crowning (see  crown, dental)
and may also be used as a preventive
technique to protect the teeth. 
bone The structural material of the
skeleton that provides a rigid framework
BONE BLOOD VESSELS
B86
for the muscles and protects certain
body organs. Bone consists of several
layers: a thin outer covering (the peri-
osteum), whichcontains blood vessels
and nerves; an inner shell of hard (com-
pact or cortical) bone composed of
columns of bone cells (osteoclasts and
osteoblasts), each with a central hollow
(haversian canal) that is important for
the nutrition, growth, and repair of the
bone; and a central, mesh-like structure
(known as spongy, cancellous, or trab-
ecular bone). The cavity in the centre of
some bones, and the spaces in spongy
bone, contain bone marrow.
Bone is continuously reabsorbed by
osteoclasts and replaced by osteoblasts.
Osteoblasts encourage deposition of
calcium phosphate on the protein
framework of the bone, and osteoclasts
remove it. The actions of these cells are
controlled by hormones, which also
maintain the calcium level in the blood.
At birth, many bones consist mainly of
cartilage, which ossifies later (see ossifi-
cation). The epiphyses (growing ends of
the long bones) are separated from the
bone shaft (diaphysis) by the epiphyseal
plate. Some bones, such as certain skull
bones, do not develop from cartilage
and are known as membranous bones.
bone abscess A localized collection of
pus in a bone (see osteomyelitis).
bone age A measure of skeletal matur-
ity used to assess physical development
in children.  X-rays, which show how
much bones have grown in a particular
body area, are used to determine bone
age. (See also age.)
bone cancer Malignant growth in bone,
which may originate in the bone itself
(primary bone cancer) or, more com-
monly, occur as a result of cancer
spreading from elsewhere in the body
(secondary, or metatastic, bone cancer).
Primary bone cancers are rare. The type
that occurs most often is osteosarcoma.
Other types include  chondrosarcoma
and fibrosarcoma. Bone cancer can also
start in the bone marrow (see multiple
myeloma and leukaemia). The treatment
of primary bone cancer depends on the
extent to which the disease has spread.
If it remains confined to bone, amputa-
tion may be recommended; but it may
be possible to remove the cancer and
fill the defect with a bone graft. Radio-
therapy or  chemotherapy, or both, may
also be needed 
The cancers that spread readily to
form secondary bone cancer are those
of the breast, lung, prostate, thyroid,
and kidney. These bone metastases
occur commonly in the spine, pelvis,
ribs, and skull. Pain is usually the main
symptom. Affected bones are abnorm-
ally fragile and may easily fracture.
Bone cancer that affects the spine may
cause collapse or crushing of vertebrae,
damaging the spinal cord and causing
weakness or paralysis of one or more
limbs. Secondary bone cancers from the
breast and prostate often respond to
treatment with hormone antagonists.
bone cyst An abnormal cavity in a
bone. Bone cysts typically develop at
one end of a long bone and maybe dis-
covered only by chance after a bone
fracture at the site of the cyst. Minor
surgery to scrape out the cyst and fill
the the cavity with bone chips usually
cures the condition, although many
small cysts do not need treatment.
bone density The compactness of bone
tissue in relation to its volume. A
decrease in bone density is a normal
part of aging. However, in some people,
excessive loss of density (see  osteo-
porosis)can lead to fractures. Less
commonly, an increase in bone density
(see  osteosclerosis) occurs in certain
BONE ABSCESS BONE DENSITY
B
Compact bone Periosteum
Blood
vessel
Nerve
Spongy
bone
BONE
Bone
marrowdisorders (see osteopetrosis; Paget＊sdis-
ease). Bone density can be measured by
a technique known as  densitometry,
which uses low-dose X-rays.
bone, disordersof  Any of the group
of disorders that affects the bones,
including fractures; bone infections such
as  osteomyelitis or a  bone abscess;
inherited conditions such as achondro-
plasia  and  osteogenesis imperfecta; and
metabolic disorders such as  osteomal-
acia, osteoporosis, and rickets. Tumours
and cysts (see  bone cancer and  bone
tumour) are another, uncommon, group
of bone disorders.
bone graft An operation in which sev-
eral small pieces of bone are taken from
one part of the body and used to repair
or replace abnormal or missing bone
elsewhere. The bone graft eventually
dies, but it acts as a scaffold upon
which strong new bone grows.
Bone is most commonly taken from
the iliac crests (upper part of the hip-
bones), which contain a large amount
of the inner, spongy bone that is espe-
cially useful for getting grafts to ※take§.
Other sources are the ribs (for curved
bone), and the ulna (in the forearm).
bone imaging Techniques for provid-
ing pictures that show the structure or
function of bones. X-ray images are the
most commonly used technique for
diagnosing fractures and injuries. More
detailed information is provided by
tomography, CT scanning, or MRI, which
can show tumours
and infections and
the effect of dis-
eased bone on the
surrounding tissues.
Radionuclide scan-
ning detects areas
throughout the skel-
eton in which there
is high bone-cell
activity. This type of
scanning is used
mainly to determine
whether or not can-
cer has spread to
the bones. 
bone marrow The
soft fatty tissue that
is found in bone
cavities; it may be red or yellow. Red
bone marrow is present in all bones at
birth and is the factory for most of the
blood cells. During the teens, red bone
marrow is gradually replaced in some
bones by less active yellow marrow. In
adults, red marrow is confined chiefly to
the spine, sternum, (breastbone), ribs,
pelvis (hip-bones), scapulae (shoulder-
blades), clavicles (collarbones), and
bones of the skull.
Stem cells within the red marrow are
stimulated to form blood cells by the
hormone erythropoietin. Yellow marrow
is composed mainly of connective tis-
sue and fat. If the body needs to
increase its rate of blood formation,
some of the yellow marrow will be
replaced by red. Sometimes marrow
fails to produce sufficient numbers of
normal blood cells, as occurs in aplastic
anaemia (see anaemia, aplastic) or when
marrow has been displaced by tumour
cells. In other cases, marrow may over-
produce certain blood cells, as occurs
in polycythaemia and leukaemia.
bone marrow biopsy A procedure to
obtain a sample of cells from the bone
marrow (aspiration biopsy) or a small core
of bone with marrow inside (trephine
biopsy). The sample is usually taken,
under local  anaesthesia, from the ster-
num (breastbone) or iliac crests  (upper
part of the hip-bones). Microscopic
examination gives information on the
development of the blood components
BONE MARROW BIOPSY BONE, DISORDERS OF
B
Biopsy needle
extracts marrow
sample
Site of bone
marrow
BONE MARROW BIOPSY
LOCATION
87and on the presence of cells foreign to
the marrow. It is useful in the diagnosis
of many blood disorders, including  leu-
kaemia and  anaemia. It can also show
whether bone marrow has been invaded
by lymphoma or cells from other tumours.
bone marrow transplant The techni-
que of using normal red  bone marrow
to replace cancerous or defective mar-
row in a patient. In allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation (BMT), healthy
bone marrow is taken from a donor who
has a very similar tissue-type to the
recipient＊s (usually a brother or sister).
In autologous BMT, the patient＊s own
healthy bone marrow is harvested while
his or her disease is in remission and is
reinfused later. BMT is used only in the
treatment of serious, mostly potentially
fatal, blood and immune system disor-
ders, including severe aplastic anaemia
(see  anaemia, aplastic),  sickle cell anae-
mia, and  leukaemia. An alternative
treatment is  stem-cell transplantation,
in which cells from the umbilical cord of
a newborn baby or bloodstream of an
adult are used instead of bone marrow. 
Before transplantation, all of the reci-
pient＊s marrow is destroyed by cytotoxic
drugs or radiation in order to prevent
rejection of the donated cells and to kill
any cancer cells present. The donor
bone marrow is transfused into the cir-
culation from where cells find their way
to the bone marrow cavities and start to
grow. In autologous BMT, the patient＊s
bone marrow is stored by cryopreserva-
tion. Before being frozen, the marrow is
usually treated to eliminate any unde-
tected cancerous cells. If the patient＊s
disease recurs, the stored marrow can
then be reinfused.
The major risks with BMT are infection
during the recovery period and rejection
(known as  graft-versus-host disease, or
GVHD).  Immunosuppressant drugs are
used to prevent and treat rejection. The
risk of GVHD may be reduced by remov-
ing the  T-cells from the bone marrow
using monoclonal antibodies (see anti-
body, monoclonal) before reinfusion.
GVHD does not occur with allogeneic
BMT or stem-cell transplantation. 
bone tumour A bone swelling that may
be cancerous (see bone cancer) or non-
cancerous. The most common type of
noncancerous bone tumour is an osteo-
chondroma. Other types are osteoma and
chondroma (see chondromatosis). Treat-
ment is only necessary if the tumour
becomes very large or causes symptoms
by pressing on other structures. In such
cases, the tumour can be removed by
surgery. Osteoclastoma (also called a
giant cell tumour), which usually occurs
in the arm or leg of a young adult, is ten-
der and painful and has to be removed.
booster A follow-up dose of  vaccine,
given to reinforce or prolong immunity
after an initial course of immunization.
borborygmi see bowel sounds.
borderline personality disorder A
personality disorder that falls between
neurotic and psychotic levels. Mood
changes are often rapid and inappro-
priate. Angry outbursts are common, as
are impulsive, self-damaging acts such
as gambling or suicide attempts. 
Bornholm disease One of the names
for epidemic pleurodynia, an infectious
viral disease that is characterized by
severe chest pains and fever. 
bottle-feeding Infant feeding using a
milk preparation usually based on mod-
ified cow＊s milk. Formula milk contains
similar proportions of protein, fat, lac-
tose (milk sugar), and minerals as those
in human milk, but it lacks the protective
antibodies that are present in breast
milk. Vitamins are added. Bottle-fed
babies are at higher risk of gastrointes-
tinal infections than breast-fed babies
and may be more likely to develop aller-
gic disorders. (See also feeding, infant.)
botulinum toxin A potentially lethal
toxin produced by the bacterium  CLOS-
TRIDIUM BOTULINUM (see  botulism). In
tiny doses, botulinum toxin is used as a
drug to control muscle spasms in some
disorders (see  blepharospasm;  facial
spasm). It is also sometimes injected
into facial muscles to reduce visible
wrinkles temporarily.
botulism A rare but serious form of poi-
soning caused by eating improperly
canned or preserved food contaminated
with a toxin produced by the bacterium
CLOSTRIDIUM BOTULINUM. The toxin causes
progressive muscular paralysis as well
as other disturbances of the central and
88
BONE MARROW TRANSPLANT BOTULISM
B89
peripheral nervous system. CLOSTRIDIUM
BOTULINUM produces spores that resist
boiling, salting, smoking, and some
forms of pickling. These spores, which
multiply only in the absence of air,
thrive in canned or improperly pre-
served food. Ingestion of even minute
amounts of toxin can lead to severe
poisoning. Symptoms first occur within
8每36hours and include difficulty in
swallowing and speaking, vomiting, and
double vision. Prompt treatment is
vital. In infants, the toxin can form with-
in the body after the ingestion of foods
contaminated with the bacterium, such
as honey. (See also food poisoning.)
bovine spongiform encephalopathy
(BSE) A neurological disorder in cattle
that can be transmitted to humans
through consumption of infected meat,
causing  Creutzfeldt每Jakob disease. (See
also encephalopathy.)
bowel A common name for the large
and/or small intestines.
bowel movements, abnormal See
faeces, abnormal.
bowel sounds Sounds made by the pas-
sage of air and fluid through the intestine.
Absent or abnormal bowel  sounds may
indicate a disorder. Those that are audi-
ble without a stethoscope are known as
borborygmi and are a normal part of
the digestive process, but they may be
exaggerated by anxiety and some disor-
ders of the intestine.
Bowen＊s disease A rare skin disorder
that sometimes becomes cancerous. A
flat, regular-shaped, patch of red, scaly
skin forms, most commonly on the 
face or hands. The diseased skin is
removed surgically or destroyed by
freezing or cauterization. 
bowleg An outward curving of bones in
the legs that results in wide separation
of the knees when the feet are together.
Bowlegs are common in very young
children and are a normal part of de-
velopment. In most cases, the curve
straightens as the child grows. If the
bowing is severe, is on one side only, or
persists beyond the age of 6, a doctor
should be consulted. Surgery may be
needed. Rarely, leg deformity is a result
of bone disease, particularly  rickets (a
vitamin D deficiency) in children.
brace, dental See  orthodontic appli-
ances.
brace, orthopaedic An appliance worn
to support part of the body or hold it in
a fixed position. It may be used to correct
or halt the development of a deformity,
to aid mobility, or to relieve pain. (See
also caliper splint; corset; splint.)
brachial artery The  artery that runs
down the inner side of the upper arm,
between the armpit and the elbow.
brachialgia Pain or stiffness in the arm
that is often accompanied by pain, ting-
ling and/or numbness of the hands or
fingers, and weak hand grip. It may be a
symptom of underlying disorders such
as frozen shoulder or nerve compression
from cervical osteoarthritis.
brachial plexus A collection of large
nerve trunks that are formed from nerve
roots of the lower part of the cervical
spine (in the neck) and the upper part of
the thoracic spine (in the chest). These
nerve trunks divide into the musculocu-
taneous, axillary, median, ulnar, and radial
nerves, which control muscles in and re-
ceive sensation from the arm and hand.
Injuries to this plexus can cause loss of
movement and sensation in the arm.
In severe injuries, there may be dam-
age to both the upper and the lower
nerve roots of the brachial plexus, pro-
ducing complete paralysis of the arm.
Paralysis may be temporary if the
stretching was not severe enough to
tear nerve fibres.  Nerve roots that have
been torn can be repaired by nerve
grafting, a microsurgery procedure. If a
nerve root has become separated from
the spinal cord, surgical repair will not
be successful. Apart from injuries, the
brachial plexus may be compressed by
the presence of a cervical rib (extra rib).
brachytherapy See  interstitial radio-
therapy.
bradycardia An abnormally slow heart-
rate. Most people have a heart-rate of
between 60 and 100 beats per minute.
Many athletes and healthy people who
exercise regularly and vigorously have
slower rates. In others, bradycardia may
indicate an underlying disorder such as
hypothyroidism or heart block. Bradycar-
dia may also occur as a result of taking
beta-blocker drugs. Profound or sudden
BRADYCARDIA BOVINE SPONGIFORM ENCEPHALOPATHY
Bbradycardia may cause a drop in blood
pressure that results in fainting (see
vasovagal attack).
Braille A system of embossed dots,
now accepted for all written languages,
that enables blind people to read and
write. The system is based on 6 raised
dots, which can be combined in differ-
ent ways. There are 2 types of Braille. In
grade I, each symbol represents an indi-
vidual letter or punctuation mark. In
grade II, which is the more widely used,
symbols represent common letter com-
binations or words.
brain The major organ of the  nervous
system, located in the  cranium (skull).
The brain receives, sorts, and interprets
sensations from the nerves that extend
from the  central nervous system (brain
and spinal cord) to the rest of the body;
it initiates and coordinates nerve signals
involved in activities such as speech,
movement, thought, and emotion.
An adult brain weighs about 1.4kg and
has 3 main structures: the largest part,
the  cerebrum, consisting of left and
right hemispheres; the  brainstem; and
the cerebellum.Each hemisphere in the
cerebrum has an outer layer called the
cortex,  consisting of grey matter, which
is rich in nerve-cell bodies and is the
main region for conscious thought, sen-
sation, and movement.  Beneath the
cortex are tracts of nerve fibres called
white matter, and, deeper within the
hemispheres, the basal ganglia. The sur-
face of each hemisphere is divided by
fissures (sulci) and folds (gyri) into dis-
tinct lobes (occipital, frontal, parietal,
and temporal lobes), named after the
skull bones that overlie them. A thick
band of nerve fibres called the corpus
callosum connects the hemispheres.
The cerebrum encloses a central group
of structures that includes the  thalami
and the hypothalamus, which has close
connections with the  pituitary gland.
Encircling the thalami is a complex of
nerve centres called the  limbic system.
These structures act as links  between
parts of the cerebrum and the brainstem
lying beneath the thalami.
The brainstem is  concerned mainly
with the control of vital functions such as
breathing and blood pressure. The cere-
bellum at the back of the brain controls
BRAILLE BRAIN
B
Thalamus 
Cerebrum
Corpus
callosum
BRAIN
Midbrain
Pons
Cerebellum
Medulla
Brainstem
Hypothalamus
Pituitary gland
Cerebrospinal fluid
Meninges
Spinal cord
Cerebral cortex
Skull
9091
balance, posture, and muscular coordi-
nation. Both of these regions operate at
a subconscious level.
The brain and spinal cord are encased
in 3 layers of membranes, known as
meninges. Cerebrospinal fluid circulates
between the layers and within the 4 main
brain cavities called ventricles. This fluid
helps to nourish and cushionthe brain.
The brain receives about 20per cent of
the blood from the heart＊s output. 
brain abscess A collection of pus, sur-
rounded by inflamed tissues, within the 
brain or on its surface. The most com-
mon sites are the frontal and temporal
lobes of the cerebrum in the forebrain.
Brain abscesses may occur after a
head injury, but most cases result from
the spread of infection from elsewhere
in the body, such as the middle ear or
sinuses. Another cause is an infection
following a penetrating brain injury.
Multiple brain abscesses may occur as a
result of blood-borne infection, most
commonly in patients with a heart-valve
infection (see  endocarditis). Symptoms
include headache, drowsiness, vomiting,
visual disturbances, fever, seizures, and
symptoms, such as speech disturbances,
that are due to local pressure. Treatment
is with  antibiotic drugs and surgery. A
craniotomy may be needed to open and
drain the abscess. Untreated, brain abs-
cesses can cause permanent damage or
can be fatal. Despite treatment, scarring
can cause epilepsy in some cases.
brain damage Degeneration or death
of nerve cells and tracts within the brain
that may be localized to a particular
area of the brain or diffuse. Diffuse
damage most commonly results from
prolonged cerebral hypoxia (which may
occur in a baby during a difficult birth),
cardiac arrest,  respiratory arrest, or
causes such as poisoning or  status
epilepticus (prolonged convulsions). The
damage may also occur gradually due
to environmental pollutants such as lead
or mercury compounds (see Minamata
disease) or if nerve-cell poisons build up
in the brain, as in untreated phenylketo-
nuria. Other possible causes include
brain infections such as encephalitis.
Localized brain damage may occur as
a result of a  head injury,  stroke,  brain
tumour, or  brain abscess. At birth, a
raised blood level of bilirubin (in haem-
olytic disease of the newborn) causes
local damage to the basal ganglia deep
within the brain. This leads to a condi-
tion called  kernicterus. Brain damage
that occurs before, during, or after birth
may result in cerebral palsy.
Damage to the brain may result in dis-
abilities such as  learning difficulties or
disturbances of movement or speech.
Nerve cells and tracts in the brain and
spinal cord cannot repair themselves
once they have been damaged, but some
return of function may be possible.
brain death The irreversible cessation
of all functions of the brain, including
the brainstem. (See also death.)
brain, disordersof Defects and disor-
ders of the brain, which may have one of
numerous causes including infection, inj-
ury, brain tumour, or a lack of blood or
oxygen (hypoxia). Because the brain is
encased in the skull, any space-occupy-
ing tumour, brain abscess, or haematoma
creates raised pressure, which impairs
the function of the whole brain. Brain
disorders that are localized in a small
region may affect a specific function
such as speech (see  aphasia). More
often, damage is more diffuse and the
symptoms can be varied and numerous.
Some brain disorders are  congenital
due to genetic or chromosomal disor-
ders, as in Down＊s syndrome. Structural
defects that arise during the develop-
ment of the fetus in the womb include
hydrocephalus and anencephaly.
Reduced oxygen supply may occur at
birth, causing  cerebral palsy. Later in
life, cerebral hypoxia can result from
choking or from arrest of breathing and
heartbeat. From middle age onwards,
cerebrovascular disease is the most
important cause of brain disorder. If an
artery within the brain becomes blocked
or ruptures, leading to haemorrhage,
the result is a stroke. The brain may also
be damaged by a blow to the head see
head injury).
Infection within the brain (enceph-
alitis) may be due to viral infection.
Infection of the membranes surrounding
the brain (meningitis) is generally due
to bacterial infection. Creutzfeldt每Jakob
BRAIN, DISORDERS OF BRAIN ABSCESS
Bblood flow and metabolic activity in the
brain to be measured.
Ultrasound scanning is used only in
premature or very young babies since
ultrasound waves cannot penetrate the
bones of a mature skull. 
brainstem A stalk of nerve tissue that
forms the lowest part of the brain and
links with the spinal cord. The brainstem
acts partly as a highway for messages
travelling between other parts of the
brain and spinal cord. It also connects
with 10 of the 12 pairs of cranial nerves
(which emerge directly from the under-
side of the brain) and controls basic
functions such as breathing, vomiting,
and eye reflexes. Brainstem activities
are below the level of consciousness,
and they operate mainly on an auto-
matic basis.
The brainstem is composed of 3 main
parts: the midbrain, pons, and medulla.
The midbrain contains the nuclei (nerve-
cell centres) of the 3rd and 4th cranial
nerves. It also contains cell groups invol-
ved in smooth coordination of limb
movements. The pons contains nerve
fibres that connect with the cerebellum.
It also houses the nuclei for the 5th每8th
cranial nerves. The medulla contains the
nuclei of the 9th每12th cranial nerves. It
also contains the ※vital centres§ (groups
of nerve cells that regulate the  heart-
beat, breathing, blood pressure, and
digestion (information on which is relay-
edvia the 10th cranial nerve (see vagus
92
disease is a rare, fatal brain disease
associated with an infective agent called
a prion which, in some cases, has been
linked with BSE (bovine spongiform
encephalopathy), a disease in cattle.
Multiple sclerosis is a progressive
disease of the brain and spinal cord.
Degenerative brain diseases include Alz-
heimer＊s disease and Parkinson＊s disease.
Emotional or behavioural disorders are
generally described as psychiatric ill-
nesses; but the distinction between
neurological and psychiatric disorders
is now much less clear.
brain failure See  brain syndrome,
organic.
brain haemorrhage Bleeding within
or around the brain that is caused
either by injury or by spontaneous rup-
ture of a blood vessel. There are 4
possible types of brain haemorrhage:
subdural,  extradural,  subarachnoid, and
intracerebral. Extradural and subdural
haemorrhages are usually the result of 
a blow to the head (see  head injury).
Subarachnoid and intracerebral haem-
orrhages usually occur spontaneously
due to rupture of  aneurysms or small
blood vessels in the brain.
brain imaging Techniques that provide
pictures of the brain; they are used to
detect injury or disease and include 
X-rays, angiography, CT scanning, MRI,
PET (positron emission tomography)
scanning, and  SPECT (single photon
emission CT). X-ray films can show
changes in the skull caused by a fracture
or, rarely, by a  brain tumour or  aneur-
ysm. Angiography shows up the blood
vessels in the brain, and is used to
investigate  subarachnoid haemorrhage,
aneurysms, abnormalities of the blood
vessels, and other circulatory disorders.
CT scanning gives images of the brain
substance; it gives clear pictures of the
ventricles (fluid-filled cavities) and can
reveal tumours, blood clots, strokes,
aneurysms, and abscesses. MRI is espe-
cially helpful in showing tumours of the
posterior fossa (back of the skull). PET
and SPECT scanning are specialized
forms of radionuclide scanning that use
small amounts of radioactive material
to give information about brain func-
tion as well as structure. They enable
BRAIN FAILURE BRAINSTEM
B
Medulla
Spinal
cord
Brainstem
Midbrain
Pons
Thalamus
BRAINSTEM
LOCATION93
nerve). Nerve-cell groups in the brain-
stem, known collectively as the reticular
formation, alert the higher brain centres
to sensory stimuli that may require a
conscious response. Our sleep/wake cycle
is controlled by the reticular formation.
The brainstem is susceptible to the
same disorders that afflict the rest of
the central nervous system (see  brain,
disorders of). Damage to the medulla＊s
vital centres is rapidly fatal; damage 
to the reticular formation may cause 
coma. Damage to specific cranial nerve
nuclei can sometimes lead to specific
effects. For example, damage to the 7th
cranial nerve (the facial nerve) leads to
facial palsy. Degeneration of the sub-
stantia nigra in the midbrain is thought
to be a cause of Parkinson＊s disease.
brain syndrome, organic Disorder of
consciousness, intellect, or mental func-
tioning that is of organic (physical), as
opposed to psychiatric, origin. Causes
include degenerative diseases, such as
Alzheimer＊s disease; infections; certain
drugs; or the effects of injury, stroke, or
tumour. Symptoms range from mild
confusion to stupor or coma. They may
also include disorientation, memory
loss, hallucinations, and delusions (see
delirium). In the chronic form, there is a
progressive decline in intellect, memory,
and behaviour (see  dementia). Treat-
ment is more likely to be successful
with the acute form. In chronic cases,
irreversible brain damage may already
have occurred. (See also psychosis.)
brain tumour An abnormal growth in
or on the brain. Tumours may be primary
growths arising directly from tissues
within the skull or metastases (second-
ary growths) that have spread from
tumours elsewhere in the body. The
cause of primary brain tumours is not
known. About 60per cent are  gliomas
(frequently cancerous), which arise from
the brain tissue. Other primary tumours
include meningiomas, acoustic neuromas,
and  pituitary tumours. Most of these
tumours are noncancerous, but their
size can cause local damage. Certain
types of primary brain tumour mainly
affect children. These include 2 types of
glioma called medulloblastoma and cere-
bellar astrocytoma. Primary brain tumours
virtually never spread (metastasize)
outside the central nervous system.
Symptoms include muscle weakness,
loss of vision, or other sensory disturb-
ances, speech difficulties, and epileptic
seizures. Increased pressure within the
skull can cause headache, visual distur-
bances, vomiting, and impaired mental
functioning. Hydrocephalus may occur.
When possible, primary tumours are
removed by surgery after opening the
skull (see craniotomy). In cases where a
tumour cannot be completely removed,
as much as possible of it will be cut
away to relieve pressure. For primary
and secondary tumours,  radiotherapy
or  anticancer drugs may also be given.
Corticosteroid drugs are often pre-
scribed temporarily to reduce the size of
a tumour and associated brain swelling.
bran The fibrous outer covering of grain
that cannot be digested. The fibre is
used as a bulk-forming  laxative to pre-
vent constipation (see fibre, dietary).
branchial disorders Disorders due to
abnormal development, in an embryo,
of the branchial arches (paired segmen-
ted ridges of tissue in each side of the
throat). They include branchial cyst and
branchial fistula. A branchial cyst is a soft
swelling, containing a pus-like or clear
fluid, that appears on the side of the
neck in early adulthood. Treatment is by
surgical removal. A branchial fistula oc-
curs between the back of the throat and
the external surface of the neck, where
it appears as a small hole, usually noted
at birth. A hole in the neck that does
not extend to the back of the throat is a
branchial cleft sinus. A branchial fistula
or cleft sinus may discharge mucus or
pus and may be removed surgically.
brash, water See waterbrash. 
Braxton Hicks＊ contractions Short
relatively painless contractions of the
uterus during pregnancy. They may be
felt in late pregnancy and are some-
times mistaken for labour pains.
breakbone fever  A tropical viral ill-
ness, also called dengue, that is spread
by mosquitoes.
breakthrough bleeding Bleeding or
staining (※spotting§) from the vagina
between periods in women taking an
oral contraceptive. The bleeding is most
BREAKTHROUGH BLEEDING BRAIN SYNDROME, ORGANIC
B94
common during the first few months of
taking the pill and is caused by incom-
plete suppression of the  endometrium.
(See also vaginalbleeding.)
breast Either 1 of the 2 mammary glands,
which, in women, provide milk to nour-
ish a baby and are secondary  sexual
characteristics. In males, the breast is an
immature version of the female breast.
At puberty, a girl＊s breasts begin to
develop: the areola (the circular area of
pigmented skin around the nipple) swells
and the nipple enlarges. This is followed
by an increase in glandular tissue and
fat. The adult female breast consists of
15每20 lobes of milk-secreting glands
embedded in fatty tissue. The ducts of
these glands have their outlet in the
nipple. Bands of fine ligaments deter-
mine the breast＊s height and shape. The
areolar skin contains sweat glands, seb-
aceous glands, and hair follicles. 
The size and shape
and general appear-
ance of the breasts
may vary during the
menstrual cycle, dur-
ing pregnancy and
lactation, and after
the menopause.
During pregnancy,
oestrogen and  pro-
gesterone, secreted by
the ovary and pla-
centa, cause the milk-
producing glands to
develop and become
active and the nip-
ple to become larger.
Just before and after
childbirth, the glandsin  the breast pro-
duce a watery fluid known as colostrum.
This fluid is replacedby milk a few days
later. Milk production and its release is
stimulated by the hormone prolactin.
breast abscess A collection of pus in
the mammary gland, usually in a
woman who is lactating (producing milk).
Breast abscesses develop if acute masti-
tis is not treated promptly. They occur
most commonly during the first month
after a woman＊s first delivery. The initial
symptoms are of acute mastitis. The
abscess develops in one area, which be-
comes very firm, red, and extremely
painful. The treatment usually includes
antibiotic drugs and repeated aspiration
of the pus with a needle and syringe.
Rarely, surgical drainage may be needed.
breastbone The common name for the
sternum, the front part of the thorax.
breast cancer A cancerous tumour of
the breast. The incidence is raised in
women whose menstrual periods began
at an early age and whose menopause
was late; in those who had no children
or had their first child later in life; in
those with mothers or sisters who had
breast cancer; and in those who are
obese. The disease is also more com-
mon in countries in which the typical
diet contains a lot of fat. One form of
breast cancer has a genetic component;
2 genes called BRAC1 and BRAC2 have
been identified and appear to be
involved in this type of breast cancer.
The first sign of breast cancer may be a
painless lump. Other symptoms may in-
clude a dark discharge from the nipple,
retraction (indentation) of the nipple, and
an area of dimpled, creased skin over the
lump. In 90 per cent of the cases, only 1
breast is affected. The cancer may be sus-
pected after discovering a lump during
breast self-examination or mammography.
If a lump is detected, cells will be col-
lected from it by  needle aspiration or
surgical biopsy. If the lump is cancerous,
the treatment given depends on the
woman＊s age, the size of the tumour,
whether or not there are signs of spread
to the  lymph nodes, and the sensitivity
of the tumour cells to hormones, as
assessed in the laboratory. A small
tumour, with no evidence of having
spread outside the breast, is removed
surgically. Lymph nodes in the armpit
are also commonly removed at the same
time. Surgery may be combined with
radiotherapy and/or anticancerdrugs. 
Secondary tumours in other parts of
the body are treated with anticancer
drugs and hormones. Regular check-ups
are required to detect recurrence or 
the development of a new cancer in the
other breast. If the cancer recurs, it can
be controlled, in some cases, for years
by drugs and/or radiotherapy.
breast cyst A fluid-filled lump that forms
within the milk-producing tissue of the
BREAST BREAST CYST
B
Muscle
Fatty tissue
Nipple
Areola
Milk-secreting
gland
BREAST
Milk
duct95
breast. Breast cysts most commonly affect
women in their 40s and 50s, especiallyin
the years around the menopause. A lump
can be diagnosed as a cyst by ultrasound
scanning, a mammography, or by with-
drawing fluid from it with a syringe and
needle, which usually results in the lump
disappearing. About half of all women
who have a breast cyst will develop future
cysts. Any new breast lump should be
seen by a doctor to confirm the diagnosis. 
breast, disorders of the Disorders af-
fecting the breast that are mostly minor
and respond readily to treatment. The
most important causes of problems are
infection, such as mastitis, tumours, and
hormonal changes.  Breast cysts,  fibro-
adenomas, other noncancerous tumours,
or, more rarely, breast cancer may occur.
Breast pain and tenderness is common
just before menstruation or when a woman
is taking hormones. Before menstruation,
breasts may become bigger and lumpy.
Such lumps shrink when menstruation
is over. Hormonal disorders may, rarely,
cause  galactorrhoea (abnormal milk
production). In men, gynaecomastia may
result from hormonal disturbance or
treatment with certain drugs.
breast enlargement surgery  A type
of mammoplasty.
breast-feeding The natural method of
infant feeding from birth to weaning.
Human milk contains the ideal balance
of nutrients for a baby and provides val-
uable antibodies against infections. For
the first few days after birth, the breasts
produce  colostrum. Milk flow is stimu-
lated by the baby＊s sucking and is
usually established within 3每4 days.
Breast-feeding problems may occuras
a result of engor-
ged breasts and
cracked nipplesor
if the baby has
problems sucking;
a breast-feeding
advisor may be
able to helpwith
these difficulties.
Breast-feeding can
sometimes cause
an infection that
leads to a  breast
abscess. In such
cases, treatment with  antibiotic drugs
maymean that it is possible to con-
tinue breast-feeding.
breast implant An artificial structure
surgically introduced into the breast to
increase its size (see mammoplasty).
breast lump Any mass, swelling, or cyst
that can be felt in the breast tissue. At
least 90 per cent of lumps are noncan-
cerous; the rest are breast cancer. Many
women have generally lumpy breasts,
with the lumps more obvious in the days
before a period. Once known as fibrocys-
ticdisease or  fibroadenosis, this is now
considered to be a variation of normal.
Lumpy breasts do not increase the risk
of developing breast cancer. However, any
new, distinct, or separate lump should be
assessed by a doctor. In a young woman,
a single lump is most likely to be a
fibroadenoma. This noncancerous growth
is usually round, firm, and rubbery, cau-
sesno pain, and can be moved about
beneath the skin using the fingertips. In
an older woman, a lumpis more likely to
be a noncancerous, fluid-filled breast cyst.
Regular breast self-examination may de-
tect any changes. Treatment depends on
the cause and type of lump. Cysts can be
drained in a simple outpatient procedure.
Other lumps can be removed surgically. 
breast pump A device used to draw
milk from the breasts in order to relieve
overfull breasts during lactation, to ex-
press milk for future use, or to feed a
baby who is unable to suckle. 
breast reconstruction See mammoplasty.
breast reduction See mammoplasty.
breast self-examination Visual and
manual examination of the breasts car-
ried out by a woman to detect lumps
BREAST SELF-EXAMINATION BREAST, DISORDERS OF THE
B
AREA TO BE
EXAMINED
BREAST SELF-EXAMINATION
Entire breast
and armpit
are felt
Hand is held flat and
the breast pressed
gently with the
fingertips96
and other changes that might be an
indication of early breast cancer. To carry
out self-examination, the breasts should
be checked in a mirror for any dimpling
of the skin or changes in the nipples or
breast size and shape. Then, with one
arm behind the head, and using small
circular movements, the breast should
be gently but firmly pressed. The entire
breast, armpit area, and nipple should
be examined. Regular self-examination
helps a woman to become familiar with
the appearance and feel of her breasts;
any changes should be reported to a
doctor without delay. 
breast tenderness Soreness or tender-
ness of the breasts, often with a feeling
of fullness. Breast tenderness is an
extremely common problem. In most
women it is cyclical, varying in severity
in response to the hormonal changes of
the menstrual cycle. It is usually most
severe before a period (see  premenst-
rual syndrome). It tends to affect both
breasts and may be aggravated by
stress or caffeine in drinks. Breast ten-
derness can also be noncyclical and
may be caused by muscle strain or mas-
titis. During lactation, it may be due to
engorgement with milk. Rarely, tender-
ness may be due to a  breast cyst or
breast cancer. However, examination by
a doctor will exclude any underlying
problems. Women with large breasts
are more likely to suffer from both cycli-
cal and noncyclical breast tenderness. 
Cyclical tenderness may be relieved 
by reduced caffeine intake, relaxation
exercises for stress, a well-fitting bra, or
weight loss to reduce breast size. If
these measures do not work, hormonal
treatment may be recommended.
breath-holding attacks Periods dur-
ing which a toddler holds his or her
breath, usually as an expression of pain,
frustration, or anger. The child usually
becomes red or even blue in the face
after a few seconds, and may faint.
Breathing quickly resumes as a natural
reflex, ending the attack. Attacks cause
no damage and are usually outgrown.
breathing The process by which air
passes into and out of the lungs to
allow the blood to take up oxygen and
dispose of carbon dioxide. Breathing is
controlled by the respiratory centre in
the brainstem. When air is inhaled, the
diaphragm contracts and flattens. The
intercostal muscles (muscles between
the ribs) contract and pull the ribcage
upwards and outwards. The resulting in-
crease in chest volume causes the lungs
to expand, and the reduced pressure
draws air into the lungs. When air isex-
haled, the chest muscles and diaphragm
relax, causing the ribcage to sink and
the lungs to contract, squeezing air out.
In normal, quiet breathing, only about
a 10th of the air in the lungs passes out
to be replaced by the same amount of
fresh air (tidal volume). This new air
mixes with the stale air (residual vol-
ume) already held in the lungs. The
normal breathing rate for an adult at
rest is 13每17 breaths per minute. (See
also respiration.)
BREAST TENDERNESS BREATHING
B
Air enters
expanding
lungs
INHALATION EXHALATION
BREATHING
Air is
inhaled
Ribs move
upwards and
outwards
Air is
squeezed
out of
contracting
lungs
Air is
exhaled
Ribs move
downwards
and inwards
Diaphragm
contracts
and
flattens
Diaphragm
relaxes and
moves
upwards97
breathing difficulty Laboured or dis-
tressed breathing that includes a change
in the rate and depth of breathing or a
feeling of breathlessness. Some degree
of breathlessness is normal after exer-
cise, particularly in unfit or overweight
people. Breathlessness at rest is always
abnormal and is usually due to disorders
that affect the airways (see  asthma),
lungs (see  pulmonary disease, chronic
obstructive), or cardiovascular system (see
heart failure). Severe anxiety can result in
breathlessness, even when the lungs are
normal (see  hyperventilation). Damage
to the breathing centre in the brainstem
due to a stroke or headinjury can affect
breathing. This may also happen as a
side effect of certain drugs.  Ventilator
assistance is sometimes needed.
At high altitudes, the lungs have to
work harder in order to provide the
body with sufficient oxygen (see moun-
tain sickness). Breathlessness may occur
in severe anaemia because abnormal or
low levels of the oxygen-carrying pig-
ment  haemoglobin means that the
lungs need to work harder to supply the
body with oxygen. Breathing difficulty
that intensifies on exertion may be
caused by reduced circulation of blood
through the lungs. This may be due to
heart failure,  pulmonary embolism, or
pulmonary hypertension. Breathing dif-
ficulty due to air-flow obstruction may
be caused by chronic  bronchitis, asth-
ma, an allergic reaction, or lung cancer.
Breathing difficulty may also be due to
inefficient transfer of oxygen from the
lungs into the bloodstream. Temporary
damage to lung tissue may be due to
pneumonia,  pneumothorax,  pulmonary
oedema, or  pleuraleffusion. Permanent
lung damage may be due to emphysema.
Chest pain (for example, due to a bro-
ken rib) that is made worse by chest or
lung movement can make normal
breathing difficult and painful, as can
pleurisy, which is associated with pain
in the lower chest and often in the
shoulder tip of the affected side.
Abnormalities of the skeletal structure
of the thorax (chest), such as severe
scoliosis or kyphosis, may cause difficulty
in breathing by impairing normal move-
ments of the ribcage.
breathing exercises Techniques for
learning to control the rate and depth
of breathing. They aim to teach people
to inhale through the nose, while
expanding the chest, and then to exhale
fully through the mouth, while contract-
ing the abdominal muscles. They are
used after chest surgery and for people
with chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease (see  pulmonary disease, chronic
obstructive). Breathing exercises can
also help people with anxiety disorders
and may help to relieve symptoms in
some people with asthma.
In  yoga, deep rhythmic breathing is
used to achieve a state of relaxation.
During  childbirth, breathing exercises
relax the mother and also help to con-
trol contractions and reduce pain. (See
also physiotherapy.)
breathlessness A feeling of laboured
breathing. Breathlessness is a normal
response to exercise or exertion but
may also be caused by some underlying
disorders (see breathing difficulty). 
breech delivery A birth in which the
fetus presents buttocks first. Many
fetuses lie in a breech position before
week 32 of pregnancy, but most of them
turn by week 36. The 3 per cent that do
not turn are in 1 of 3 types of breech
presentation. A complete breech is one
in which the fetus is curled up. In a
frank breech, the legs are extended and
the feet are close to the face. In a
footling breech, 1 or both feet are posi-
tioned over the cervix. Sometimes, a
mother with a fetus in a breech presen-
tation is offered a procedure to turn the
fetus around after week 36 of pregnancy.
Often, one twin fetus is a breech. In
some breech deliveries, a  Caesarean
section may be recommended.
bridge, dental False teeth that are
attached to natural teeth on either side
of a gap left by a missing tooth or teeth.
(See also denture.)
Bright＊s disease Another name for
glomerulonephritis.
brittle bones Bones with an increased
tendency to fracture. They are a feature
of osteoporosis and may occur in people
who are taking corticosteroiddrugs, are
immobile, or have certain hormonal
disorders. In  osteomalacia, the bones
BRITTLE BONES BREATHING DIFFICULTY
B98
are soft and have an increased tendency
both to become deformed and to frac-
ture. The inherited disorder osteogenesis
imperfecta is a rare cause of brittle
bones and frequent fractures and is
usually detected in infancy. 
Broca＊s area An area of the cerebral
cortex (the outer layer of the brain) that
is responsible for speech origination.
broken tooth See fracture, dental.
broken veins See telangiectasia.
bromides Substances formerly used as
sedativedrugs or as  anticonvulsant
drugs in the treatment of epilepsy. They
are no longer prescribed because of
their side effects.
bromocriptine A drug used to suppress
production of the hormone prolactin to
treat conditions such as noncancerous
pituitary tumours (see  prolactinomas
and acromegaly). Bromocriptine can be
used to suppress lactation after child-
birth. The drug may also be used as a
treatment for  Parkinson＊s disease. Side
effects of bromocriptine include nausea
and vomiting. High doses may cause
drowsiness and confusion.
bronchiectasis A lung disorder in which
1 or more bronchi (the air passages
leading from the trachea) are abnormally
widened, distorted, and have damaged
linings. Bronchiectasis most often deve-
lops during childhood and was once
commonly associated with infections
such as measles and  pertussis (whoop-
ing cough). The condition is also a
complication of cystic fibrosis. It results
in pockets of long-term infection within
the airways and the continuous produc-
tion of large volumes of green or yellow
sputum (phlegm). Extensive bronchi-
ectasis causes shortness of breath. The
symptoms are usually controlled with
antibiotic drugs and postural drainage. If
the condition is confined to one area of
the lung, surgical removal of the dam-
aged area may be recommended.
bronchiole One of many small airways
of the  lungs. Bronchioles branch from
larger airways (bronchi) and subdivide
into progressively smaller tubes before
reaching the  alveoli  (see  alveolus, pul-
monary), where gases are exchanged.
bronchiolitis An acute viral infection of
the lungs, mainly affecting babies and
young children, in which the bronchi-
oles (the smaller airways branching off
from the bronchi in the lungs) become
inflamed. The most common cause is
the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).
Symptoms include rapid breathing, a
cough, and fever. Sometimes no treat-
ment is necessary but, in more severe
cases, hospital admission is needed so
that  oxygen therapy and  physiotherapy
(to clear the mucus) can be given. With
prompt treatment, sufferers usually re-
cover within a few days. Antibiotic drugs
may be prescribed to prevent any sec-
ondary bacterial infection. 
bronchitis A disorder in which the bron-
chi, the airways connecting the trachea
(windpipe) to the lungs, are inflamed.
Bronchitis results in a cough that may
produce considerable quantities of spu-
tum (phlegm) and may be acute or
chronic. Both types are more common
in smokers and in areas with high atmo-
spheric pollution. (See also  bronchitis,
acute; bronchitis, chronic.) 
bronchitis, acute A form of bronchitis
that develops suddenly but usually clears
up within a few days. It is usually due to
a viral infection. Bacterial infection of
the airways may occur as a complica-
tion. Smokers, babies, elderly people,
and those with lung disease are particu-
larly susceptible. The main symptoms
are wheezing, shortness of breath, and
a cough that produces yellow or green
sputum. There may also be pain behind
the sternum (breastbone) and fever.
Symptoms may be relieved by drinking
plenty of fluids and inhaling steam or
using a humidifier. Most cases clear up
without further treatment, but acute
bronchitis may be serious in people
who already have lung damage.
bronchitis, chronic Inflammation of
the airways, as a result of smoking, that
is always associated with emphysema.
The combination of chronic bronchitis
and emphysema are now known as chro-
nic obstructive pulmonary disease (see
pulmonary disease, chronic obstructive).
bronchoconstrictor A substance that
causes constriction (narrowing) of the
airways in the lungs. Bronchoconstric-
tors, such as  histamine, are released
during an  allergic reaction. They may
BROCA＊S AREA BRONCHOCONSTRICTOR
Bprovoke an asthma attack. The effect can
be reversed by a bronchodilator drug.
bronchodilator drugs A group of
drugs that widen the bronchioles (small
airways in the lungs) to increase air flow
and improve breathing, especially in
the treatment of  asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (see pul-
monary disease, chronic obstructive).
There are 3 main types of broncho-
dilator: sympathomimetic drugs (such
as  salbutamol),  anticholinergic drugs,
and xanthine drugs (such as  amino-
phylline). Sympathomimetic drugs are
used primarily for the rapid relief of
breathing difficulty. Anticholinergic and
xanthine drugs are more often used for
the long-term prevention of attacks of
breathing difficulty. Drugs can be given
by  inhaler, in tablet form, or, in severe
cases, by nebulizer or injection.
The main side effects of sympatho-
mimetics are palpitations and trembling.
Anticholinergics may cause dry mouth,
blurred vision, and, rarely, difficulty in
passing urine. Xanthines may cause
headaches, nausea and palpitations. 
bronchography A rarely used  X-ray
procedure for examining the bronchi,
the main air passages of the lungs.
Once used to diagnose bronchiectasis, it
has now been largely replaced by other
imaging techniques, such as  CT scan-
ning, and by the use of bronchoscopy. 
bronchopneumonia The most common
form of  pneumonia; it differs from the
other main type of pneumonia (lobar
pneumonia) in that the inflammation is
spread throughout the lungs in small
patches around the airways, rather than
being confined to one lobe. 
bronchoscopy Examination of the bron-
chi, which are the main airways of the
lungs, by means of an endoscope known
as a bronchoscope. There are 2 types of
bronchoscope: rigid and flexible. The
rigid type is a hollow viewing tube that
is passed into the bronchi via the
mouth and requires anaesthesia. The flex-
ible fibre-optic endoscope (a narrower
tube formed from light-transmitting
fibres) can be inserted through either
the mouth or nose. It can reach farther
into the lungs and requires only a mild
sedative and/or local anaesthesia.
Bronchoscopy is performed to inspect
the bronchi for abnormalities, such as
lung cancer and tuberculosis,  to collect
samples of mucus, to obtain cells, and
for taking  biopsy specimens from the
airways or samples of lung tissue. Bron-
choscopy is used in treatments such as
removing inhaled foreign bodies, des-
troying abnormal growths, and sealing
off damaged blood vessels. The last 2
are carried out by  laser treatment,  dia-
thermy, or  cryosurgery by means of
bronchoscope attachments.
BRONCHOSCOPY BRONCHODILATOR DRUGS
B
ROUTE OF
BRONCHOSCOPE
BRONCHOSCOPY
Bronchoscope with
fibre-optic cable
Eyepiece to
view bronchi
Flexible
bronchoscope
Bronchus
99bruits The sounds made in the heart,
arteries, or veins when blood circula-
tion becomes turbulent or flows at an
abnormal speed. This happens when
blood vessels become narrowed by dis-
ease (as in arteriosclerosis), when heart
valves are narrowed or damaged (as in
endocarditis), or if blood vessels dilate
(as in an  aneurysm). Bruits are usually
heard through a stethoscope.
bruxism Rhythmic grinding or clenching
of the teeth that usually occurs during
sleep. The chief underlying causes are
emotional stress and minor discomfort
when the teeth are brought together.  
BSE The abbreviation for bovine spongi-
formencephalopathy.
bubonic plague The most common
form of  plague, characterized by the
development of a bubo (swollen lymph
node) in the groin or armpit.
buccal An anatomical term, from the
Latin word for cheek, that means relat-
ing to the cheek or mouth. Some drugs
are available as buccal preparations,
which are placed between the cheek
and gum, where they dissolve and are
absorbed directly into the circulation.
buck teeth Prominent upper incisors
(front teeth), which protrude from the
mouth. Orthodontic treatment involves
repositioning the teeth with a remov-
able brace (see brace, dental) or a fixed
orthodontic appliance.
Budd每Chiari syndrome A rare disor-
der in which the veins draining blood
from the liver become blocked or nar-
rowed. Blood accumulates in the liver,
which swells.  Liverfailure and  portal
hypertension result. Treatment is aimed
at removing the cause of the obstruction:
this may be a blood clot, pressure on
the veins from a liver tumour, or a con-
genital abnormality of the veins. In most
cases, treatment has only a limited effect
and, unless a  liver transplant can be
done, the disease is fatal within 2years.
budesonide An inhaled  corticosteroid
drug used in the treatment of bronchial
asthma to prevent asthma attacks. It is
administered using an  inhaler. Side
effects of budesonide, which include
hoarseness, throat irritation and, rarely,
fungal infections, can be reduced by
rinsing the mouth after administration. 
bronchospasm Temporary narrowing of
the bronchi (airways into the lungs) due
to contraction of the muscles in the
walls of the bronchi, by inflammation of
the lining of the bronchi, or by a combi-
nation of both. Contraction may be
triggered by the release of substances
during an allergic reaction (see allergy).
When the airways are narrowed, the air
is reduced, causing wheezing or cough-
ing. Asthma is the most common cause
of bronchospasm. Other causes include
respiratory infection, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (see  pulmonary dis-
ease, chronic obstructive),  anaphylactic
shock, or allergic reaction to chemicals.
bronchus A large air passage in a lung.
Each lung has 1 main bronchus, origi-
nating at the end of the trachea
(windpipe). This main bronchus divides
into smaller branches known as seg-
mental bronchi, which further divide
into bronchioles.
bronchus, cancer of See lungcancer.
brown fat A special type of fat, found in
infants and some animals. Brown fat is
located between and around the scapu-
lae (shoulderblades) on the back. It is a
source of energy and helps infants to
maintain a constant body temperature.
brucellosis A rare bacterial infection,
caused by various strains of  BRUCELLA,
which may be transmitted to humans
from affected cattle, goats, and pigs.
Brucellosis may also be transmitted in
unpasteurized dairy products. Initially, it
causes a single bout of high fever, aches,
headache, backache, poor appetite, weak-
ness, and depression. Rarely, untreated
severe cases may lead to pneumonia or
meningitis. In long-term brucellosis, bouts
of the illness recur over months or
years; and depression can be severe. The
disease is treated by antibiotic drugs. 
bruise A discoloured area under the
skin caused by leakage of blood from
damaged capillaries (tiny blood vessels).
At first, the blood appears blue or black;
then the breakdown of  haemoglobin
turns the bruise yellow. If a bruise does
not fade after a week, or if bruises
appear for no apparent reason or are
severe after only minor injury, they may
be indications of a  bleeding disorder.
(See also blackeye; purpura.)
100
BRONCHOSPASM BUDESONIDE
B101
Buerger＊s disease A rare disorder, also
called thromboangiitis obliterans, in
which the arteries, nerves, and veins
in the legs, and sometimes those in the
arms, become severely inflamed. Blood
supply to the toes and fingers becomes
cut off, eventually causing  gangrene.
The disease is most common in men
under the age of 45 who smoke heavily. 
bulimia An illness that is characterized
by bouts of overeating usually followed
by self-induced vomiting or excessive
laxative use. Most sufferers are girls or
women between the ages of 15 and 30.
In some cases, the symptoms coexist
with those of anorexia nervosa. Repeat-
ed vomiting can lead to dehydration and
loss of potassium, causing weakness
and cramps, and tooth damage due to
the gastric acid in vomit. Treatment
includes supervision and regulation of
eating habits, and sometimes,  antide-
pressant drugs and/or psychotherapy.
bulk-forming agent A substance that
makes stools less liquid by absorbing
water: a type of antidiarrhoeal drug.
bulla A large air- or fluid-filled bubble, 
usually in the lungs or skin. Lung bullae
in young adults are usually  congenital.
In later life, lung bullae develop in
patients with  emphysema. Skin bullae
are large, fluid-filled blisters with a var-
iety of causes, including the bullous
disease pemphigus.
bumetanide A powerful, short-acting
loop diuretic drug used to treat oedema
(fluid retention) resulting from  heart
failure, nephrotic syndrome, or liver cir-
rhosis. It may be given by injection for
emergency treatment of  pulmonary
oedema. Adverse effects can include
rash and muscle pain. 
bundle branch block See heart block.
bunion A thickened pad of tissue or a
fluid-filled bursa overlying a deformed
big-toe joint. The underlying cause is 
an abnormal outward projection of the
big toe called a  hallux valgus. Small
bunions are remedied by wearing well-
fitting shoes and a special toe pad to
straighten the big toe. Large bunions
may require surgery to realign the joint
and relieve the pressure.
buphthalmos A large, prominent eye-
ball in an infant as a result of increased
pressure inside the eyeball due to con-
genital  glaucoma. Treatment of the
condition usually involves surgery to
reduce the pressure, otherwise the
child＊s sight is progressively damaged.
bupivacaine A long-acting local anaes-
thetic often used as a  nerve block,
particularly during labour and in epidur-
al anaesthesia and  spinal anaesthesia.
Side effects of bupivacaine are uncom-
mon, but high doses may cause blood
pressure to fall excessively.
buproprion Also known as amfebuta-
mone, a drug used, in combination with
self-help measures, as an aid to stop-
ping smoking. Taken as tablets, the drug
has a number of side effects, including
dry mouth, gastrointestinal disturban-
ces, and headache. Some people may
find impairment in their ability to
undertake activities such as driving.
Burkitt＊s lymphoma A cancer of lymph
tissues that is characterized by tumours
within the jaw and/or abdomen. It is
confined almost exclusively to children
living in low-lying, moist, tropical regions
of Africa and New Guinea.  Anticancer
drugs or  radiotherapy give complete or
partial cure in about 80 per cent of
cases. (See also lymphoma.)
burns Tissue damage resulting from
contact with heat, electricity, chemicals
or radiation. Burns are classified accor-
ding to the severity of damage to the
skin. A 1st-degree burn causes reddening
BURNS BUERGER＊S DISEASE
B
BURNS
A 2nd-degree
burn extends
to the dermis
A 3rd-degree
burn extends
to the fatty
layer
A 3rd-degree
burn may also
extend to the
muscle layer
A 1st-degree
burn affects
the epidermis
CLASSIFICATION OF BURNSof the skin and affects only the epider-
mis, the top layer of the skin. A
2nd-degree burn damages the skin more
deeply, extending into the dermis and
causing blister formation. A 3rd-degree
burn destroys the full skin thickness
and may extend to the muscle layer
beneath the skin. Specialist treatment,
and possibly skin grafts, is necessary for
3rd-degree burns. Electrical burns can
cause extensive tissue damage with
minimal external skin damage. A 2nd-
or 3rd-degree burn that affects more
than 10 per cent of the body surface
causes shock due to massive fluid loss.
A burn is covered with a non-stick
dressing to keep the area moist. If nec-
essary,  analgesic drugs are given, and
antibiotic drugs are prescribed if there is
any sign of infection. For extensive 2nd-
degree burns, when there may be slow
healing or a fear of infection, a topical
antibacterial agent such as silver sul-
phadiazine is used. Skin grafts are used
early in treatment to minimize scarring.
3rd-degree burns always require skin
grafting. Extensive burns may require
repeated plastic surgery.
burping Another term for belching.
burr hole A hole made in the skull by a
special drill with a rounded tip (burr). A
hole is made to relieve the pressure on
the brain that often results from bleed-
ing inside the skull, usually following a
head injury. Burr holes may be made as
part of a  craniotomy and may be life-
saving procedures.
bursa A fluid-filled sac that acts as a
cushion at a pressure point in the body,
often near a joint, where a tendon or
muscle crosses bone or other muscles.
The important bursae are around the
knee, elbow, and shoulder.
bursitis Inflammation of a bursa, causing
pain and swelling. Bursitis may result
from pressure, friction, or slight injury
to the membrane surrounding the joint,
or to infection. For example, prepatellar
bursitis (※housemaid＊s knee§) is caused
by prolonged kneeling on a hard surface.
Avoiding further pressure and taking
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are
usually all the treatment needed. Occa-
sionally, antibioticdrugs may be needed
if the bu rsa is infected.
102
bypass operations Procedures to by-
pass the blockage or narrowing of an
artery or vein or any part of the digestive
system. Arteries can become blocked or
narrowed in atherosclerosis. Obstructions
can be bypassed using sections of
healthy artery or vein from elsewhere in
the body or using synthetic tubing. Veins
are bypassed most often in patients with
diseases of the liver that cause portal
hypertension and bleeding oesophageal
varices. This kind of bypass is called a
shunt. Intestinal bypasses are employed
most commonly in patients with cancer
in which tumour growth is too extensive
to be removed. An obstructed bile duct
can be bypassed by constructing a new
opening into the digestive tract. (See
also coronary artery bypass.)
byssinosis A lung disease caused by an
unknown agent in the dust produced
during the processing of flax, cotton,
hemp, or sisal. Byssinosis produces a
feeling of tightness in the chest and
shortness of breath that may become
chronic if exposure continues. Broncho-
dilator drugs and other drugs used to
treat asthma may relieve symptoms,
but adequate ventilation and personal
protective equipment such as dust
masks will reduce the risk.
BURPING BYSSINOSIS
B103
cachexia A condition of severe weight
loss and decline in health caused by a
serious underlying disease, such as can-
cer or tuberculosis, or by starvation.
cadaver A dead human body used as a
source of transplant organs or for
anatomical study and dissection.
cadmium poisoning The toxic effects of
cadmium, a tin-like metal. Poisoning due
to the inhalation of cadmium dust or
fumes is an industrial hazard. Short-term
exposure may lead to  pneumonitis. Ex-
posure over a long period can  lead to
urinary tract calculi (stones), kidney fail-
ure, or  emphysema. Eating vegetables
grown in cadmium-rich soil, or food or
drink stored in cadmium-lined contain-
ers, can also cause poisoning.
caecum The first section of the large
intestine, joining the  ileum (the end of
the small intestine) to the  colon. The
appendix projects from the caecum.
(See also digestive system).
caesarean section An operation to
deliver a baby from the uterus through
a horizontal or, less commonly, a vertical
incision in the abdomen. A caesarean
section is performed when it is difficult
or dangerous to deliver a baby vaginally.
The procedure is performed using epidu-
ral or general anaesthesia. 
caf谷 au lait spots Patches of coffee-
coloured skin that may occur anywhere
on the body. Caf谷 au lait spots are usu-
ally oval in shape and may measure
several centimetres across. Generally, a
few spots are not significant; larger num-
bers may be a sign of neurofibromatosis.
caffeine A  stimulant drug found in cof-
fee, tea, cocoa, and cola drinks. Caffeine
reduces fatigue, improves concentration,
makes the heart pump blood faster, and
has a diuretic effect. Large quantities
may produce side effects such as agita-
tion and tremors. A regular high intake
may lead to increased  tolerance and
withdrawal symptoms, such as headaches
and tiredness, after a few hours without
caffeine. Caffeine is used in some drug
preparations, particularly in combination
with  analgesics and with  ergotamine  in
preventive treatments for migraine. 
caisson disease An alternative term for
decompression sickness.
calamine A preparation of zinc oxide
and iron oxide applied as an ointment,
lotion, or dusting powder to relieve skin
irritation and itching. Calamine may be
combined with a local anaesthetic (see
anaesthesia, local), a corticosteroid drug,
or an antihistamine drug. 
CALAMINE CACHEXIA
C
Nurse Oxygen
mask
CAESAREAN SECTION
Screen
Intravenous
fluids
Birth
partner
C
Surgeon
SITE OF
INCISION104
calcaneus The heel bone. It is one of the
tarsal bones and is the largest bone in
the foot. The Achilles tendon is attached
to the back of the calcaneus. 
calciferol An alternative name for vita-
min D2, also known as ergocalciferol
(see vitamin D).
calcification The deposition of  calcium
salts in body tissues that is part of the
normal process of bone and teeth for-
mation and the healing of fractures.
Calcification also occurs in injured mus-
cles, in arteries affected by atherosclerosis,
and when blood calcium levels are raised
by disorders of the parathyroid glands.
calcification, dental The deposition of
calcium salts in developing teeth. Pri-
mary teeth begin to calcify in a fetus at
between 3 and 6 months gestation; cal-
cification of permanent teeth (other
than the wisdom teeth) begins between
birth and 4 years. Abnormal calcification
occurs in amelogenesis imperfecta, an
inherited disorder of the enamel (see
hypoplasia, enamel), and can also result
from the absorption of high levels of
fluoride (see fluorosis).
calcinosis The abnormal deposition of
calcium salts in the skin, muscles, or
connective tissues, forming nodules. The
condition occurs in connective tissue
disorders such as  scleroderma or  der-
matomyositis.(See also calcification.)
calcipotriol A derivative of  vitamin D,
used in topical preparations for treating
the skin disorder psoriasis.
calcitonin A hormone produced by the
thyroid gland that helps to control
blood  calcium levels by slowing  loss of
calcium from the bones. A synthetic form
of calcitonin is used in the treatment of
Paget＊s disease. Calcitonin is also used
to reduce high blood levels of calcium
in hypercalcaemia.
calcium The body＊s most abundant min-
eral,  essential for cell function, muscle
contraction, the transmission of nerve
impulses, and  blood clotting. Calcium
phosphate is the hard basic constituent
of teeth and bones. Dietary sources of
calcium include dairy products, eggs,
and green, leafy vegetables. Calcium
uptake is facilitated by vitamin D.
The body＊s calcium levels are controlled
by parathyroid hormone and  calcitonin.
Abnormally high  levels in the blood
(hypercalcaemia) or abnormally low levels
(hypocalcaemia) may seriously disrupt
cell function, particularly in muscles and
nerves. (See also mineral supplements.)
calcium channel blockers Drugs used
to treat angina pectoris, hypertension, and
types of cardiac arrhythmia. Side effects
such as headaches, swollen ankles, flush-
ing,  and dizziness may occur, but tend
to diminish with continued treatment.
calculus A deposit on the teeth (see
calculus, dental) or a small, hard, crys-
talline mass that is formed in a body
cavity from certain substances in fluids
such as bile, urine, or saliva. Calculi can
occur in the gallbladder and bile ducts
(see gallstones), the kidneys, ureters, or
bladder (see calculus, urinary tract), or in
the salivary ducts.
calculus, dental A hard, crust-like de-
posit (also known as tartar) found on
the crowns and roots of the teeth. Cal-
culus forms when mineral salts in saliva
are deposited in existing plaque. Supra-
gingival calculus is a yellowish or white
deposit that forms above the gum mar-
gin, on the crowns of teeth near the
openings of  salivary gland ducts. Sub-
gingival calculus forms below the gum
margin and is brown or black. Toxins in
calculus cause gum inflammation (see
gingivitis), which may progress to de-
struction of the supporting tissues (see
periodontitis). Calculus is removed by
professional  scaling. Attention to  oral
hygiene reduces recurrence.
calculus, urinary tract A stone in the
kidneys, ureters, or bladder formed from
substances in urine.
Most urinary tract stones are com-
posed of calcium oxalate or other salts
crystallized from the urine. These may
be associated with a diet rich in oxalic
acid (found in leafy vegetables and cof-
fee); high levels of calcium in the blood
as a result of  hyperparathyroidism; or
chronic dehydration. Other types of stone
are associated with gout and some can-
cers. An infective stone is usually a result
of chronic urinary tract infection.
In developing countries, bladder stones
usually occur as a result of dietary defi-
ciencies. In developed countries, they
are usually caused by an obstruction to
CALCANEUS CALCULUS, URINARY TRACT
C105
urine flow from the bladder and/or a
longstanding urinary tract infection.
The most common symptom of a stone
in the kidney or ureter is renal colic (a
severe pain in the loin) that may cause
nausea and vomiting. There may be
haematuria (blood in the urine). A blad-
der stone is usually indicated by
difficulty in passing urine. The site of
the stone can usually be confirmed by
intravenous or retrograde urography.
Renal colic is treated with bed rest
and an opioid analgesic (painkiller). With
an adequate fluid intake, small stones
are usually passed in the urine without
problems. The first line of treatment for
larger stones is  lithotripsy, which  uses
ultrasonic or shock waves to  disinte-
grate the stones. Alternatively,  cytoscopy
can be used to crush and remove stones
in the bladder and lower ureter. In some
cases, surgery may be needed.
calendar method A method of contra-
ception, also called the rhythm method,
based on abstaining from sexual inter-
course around the time of  ovulation
(calculated by a woman＊s menstrual
cycles). The method is unreliable be-
cause the menstrual cycle may vary (see
contraception, natural methods).
calf muscles The muscles extending
from the back of the knee to the heel.
The gastrocnemius muscle starts be-
hind the knee and forms the bulky part
of the calf; under it is the soleus muscle
which starts at the back of the  tibia
(shin). The 2 muscles join to form the
Achilles tendon, which connects them to
the heel. Contraction of the calf mus-
cles pulls the heel up and is important
in walking, running, and jumping. Pain
in these muscles occurs because of
cramp,  sciatica, or, more rarely, deep
vein  thrombosis. The calf muscles may
be affected by claudication (pain caused
by walking and relieved by rest).
caliper splint An  orthopaedic device
that corrects or controls a deformed leg
or supports a leg weakened by a muscu-
lar disorder, allowing a person to stand
and walk. 
callosity See callus, skin.
callus, bony A diffuse growth of new,
soft bone that forms as part of the heal-
ing process in a  fracture. As healing
continues, the callus is replaced by hard-
er bone, and the original shape of the
bone is restored. 
callus, skin  An area of thickened skin,
usually on the hands or feet, caused by
regular or prolonged pressure or friction.
A corn  is a callus on a toe. If corns are
painful, the thickened skin can be pared
away by a chiropodist using a scalpel. 
caloric test A method of finding out
whether the labyrinth in the inner ear is
diseased. It is performed as part of in-
vestigations into vertigo (dizziness) and
hearing loss. The outer-ear canal of the
ear is briefly flooded with water at dif-
ferent temperatures. If the labyrinth is
normal, nystagmus  (rapid reflex flicker-
ing of the eyes) occurs for a predictable
period. If the labyrinth is diseased, the
response is absent or reduced. 
calorie A unit of energy. One calorie is
the amount of energy needed to raise
the temperature of 1 gram of water by
1∼C. However, the term calorie is also
used in medicine and dietetics to mean
kilocalorie, a larger unit equal to 1,000
calories. Normally, when calorie intake
matches the amount of energy expended,
body weight remains constant. If intake
exceeds expenditure, weight is usually
gained; if expenditure exceeds intake,
weight is usually lost. In general, fats
contain the most calories. Energy can
also be measured in joules: 1 calorie
equals 4.2 joules. (See also calorimetry;
diet and disease.)
calorie requirements  See  energy re-
quirements.
calorimetry The measurement of the
calorie value of foodstuffs or the energy
expenditure of a person. In direct calori-
metry, a small measure of food is burned
up inside a sealed container, which is
immersed in water. The rise in water
temperature that results is used to cal-
culate the calorie value. 
Energy production in humans is mea-
sured by  oxygen uptake. Every litre of
oxygen taken into the body produces 4.8
kilocalories of energy. Energy production
is calculated by comparing the percent-
age of oxygen in air inhaled and exhaled.
campylobacter A group of bacteria that
are among the most common causesof
gastrointestinal disorders. Thebacteria
CAMPYLOBACTER CALENDAR METHOD
Ccancrum oris See noma.
candidiasis Infection by the fungus
CANDIDA ALBICANS, also known as thrush
or moniliasis. Candidiasis affects areas
of mucous membrane in the body, most
commonly the vagina and the inside of
the mouth. In infants, it can occur in
conjunction with nappy rash.
The fungus is normally present in the
mouth and vagina but may multiply
excessively if antibiotic drugs destroy the
harmless bacteria that control its growth,
or if the body＊s resistance to infection is
lowered. Certain disorders, notably dia-
betes mellitus, and hormonal changes due
to pregnancy or oral contraceptives, may
also encourage its growth. Candidiasis
can be contracted by sexual intercourse
with an infected partner. The infection is
far more common in women than in men.
Symptoms of vaginal infection include a
thick, whitedischarge, genital irritation,
and discomfort when passing urine. Less
commonly, the penis is infected in men,
usually causing balanitis. Oral candidia-
sis produces sore, creamy-yellow, raised
patchesin  the mouth. Candidiasis may
spread to other moist areas of the body
and may also affect the gastrointestinal
tract,particularly in people with im-
paired immune systems. Treatment for
candidiasis is with topical preparations
such as creams, pessaries, or lozenges,
or with oral antifungal drugs.
canine tooth See teeth.
cannabis Preparations that are derived
from the hemp plant  CANNABIS SATIVA,
which produce euphoria and hallucina-
tions (see marijuana).
cannula A smooth, blunt-ended tube
inserted into a blood vessel, lymphatic
vessel, or body cavity, in order to intro-
duce or withdraw fluids. Cannulas are
used for  blood transfusions and  intra-
venous infusions and for draining pleural
effusions. They may be left in place for
several days if continuous testing of, or
introduction of, fluids is required.
cap, cervical A flexible contraceptive
deviceplaced directly over the  cervix to
prevent sperm from entering (see  con-
traception, barrier methods of).
Capgras＊ syndrome The delusion that
a relative or friend has been replaced by
an identical impostor. Also known as the
106
are harboured by animals  and can be
passed to humans in contaminated food,
especially poultry, causing  food poison-
ing. The bacteria also cause a form of
the inflammatory colon disease colitis.
cancer A group of diseases character-
ized by the abnormal and unrestrained
growth of cells in body organs or tissues.
Tumour-forming cells develop when the
oncogenes (genes controlling cell growth
and multiplication) in a cell or cells
undergo a series of changes. A small
group of abnormal cells develop that
divide more rapidly than normal, lack
differentiation  (they no longer perform
their specialized task), and may escape
the normal control of hormones and
nerves. Cancers differ from benign neo-
plasms (abnormal growths, such as warts)
in that they spread and infiltrate sur-
rounding tissue and may cause blockages,
destroy nerves, and erode bone. Cancer
cells may also spread via the blood ves-
sels and lymphatic system to form
secondary tumours (see metastasis). 
Causes of cancer include environmen-
tal factors such as sunlight, smoking,
pollutants, alcohol consumption, and
dietary factors. These factors may pro-
voke critical changes in body cells in
susceptible people. Susceptibility to cer-
tain cancers  may be inherited.
Many cancers are now curable, usually
by combinations of surgery, radiothera-
py, and anticancer drugs. For information
on particular cancers, refer to the organ
in question (for example lung cancer;
stomach cancer). 
cancerphobia An intense fear of devel-
oping cancer, out of proportion to the
actual risk, that significantly affects the
sufferer＊s life. Patterns of behaviour typ-
ical of obsessive每compulsive disorder (for
example, prolonged washing rituals)
may be adopted in an attempt to reduce
the risk of cancer. Psychotherapy includ-
ing behaviour therapy may be of benefit. 
cancer screening Tests to detect early
signs of cancer in groups of people who
are susceptible to cancer because of
their age, occupation, lifestyle, or genetic
predisposition. Tests for cancers of the
cervix (see  cervical smear test), breast
(see mammography), bladder, and colon
have proven to be effective.
CANCER CAPGRAS＊ SYNDROME
C※illusion of doubles＊＊, the syndrome is
seen most frequently in paranoid
schizophrenia, but also occurs in organ-
ic brain disorders (see brain syndrome,
organic) and affective disorders.
capillary Any of the vessels that carry
blood between the smallest arteries, or
arterioles, and the smallest veins, or ven-
ules (see circulatory system). Capillaries
form a fine network throughout the
body＊s organs and tissues. Their  thin
walls are permeable and allow blood and
cells to exchange constituents such as
oxygen, glucose, carbon dioxide, and
water (see respiration). Capillaries open
and close to blood flow according to
the requirements of different organs.
The opening and closing of skin capil-
laries helps to regulate temperature.
A direct blow to the body may rupture
the thin capillary walls, causing bleeding
under the surface of the skin, which in
turn causes swelling and bruising.
Increasing age, high doses of  cortico-
steroid drugs, and  scurvy (vitamin C
deficiency) make capillaries more frag-
ile; a tendency to purpura  (small areas
of bleeding under the skin) may develop.
capping, dental See crown, dental.
capsule An anatomical structure en-
closing an organ or body part: for
example, capsules enclose the liver, kid-
neys, joints, and eye lenses.
The term capsule is also used to de-
scribe a soluble, elongated shell, usually
made of gelatine, containing a drug to be
taken by mouth. The coating of some cap-
sules prevents a drug that may have an
irritant effect being released into the
stomach,or allows a drug to be released
slowly so it can be taken less frequently.
capsulitis Inflammation of a  capsule
around an organ or joint, for example as
occurs in frozen shoulder.
captopril A drug belonging to the cate-
gory ACE inhibitors, which are used in
the treatment of hypertension, heart fail-
ure, and diabetic nephropathy.
caput The Latin word for head. The
term is commonly used to refer to the
caput succedaneum, a soft, temporary
swelling in the scalp of newborn babies,
caused by pressure during labour.
Caput is also used to refer to the face,
skull, and associated organs, to the ori-
gin of a muscle, or to any enlarged
extremity, such as the caput femoris,
the head of the femur (thigh bone). 
carbamazepine An anticonvulsant drug,
chemically related to the  tricyclic anti-
depressants. Carbamazepine is mainly
used in the long-term treatment of epi-
lepsy. It is also used to treat neuralgia and
psychological disorders, such as mania.
carbaryl An insecticide used to treat
head  lice and  crab lice. Carbaryl is
applied topically as a liquid, avoiding
contact with the eyes or broken skin. 
carbenoxolone An  ulcer-healing drug
used to treat oesophageal inflammation
and ulceration. A gel containing carben-
oxolone is used to relieve mouth ulcers.
carbimazole A drug that is used to treat
hyperthyroidism (overactivity of the thy-
roid gland). Carbimazole is slow to take
effect, so beta-blockers may be given to
relieve symptoms in the interim. Long-
term treatment with carbimazole may
reduce production of blood cells, so
regular blood counts are required. Ad-
verse effects may include headaches,
dizziness, joint pain, and nausea.
carbohydrates A group of compounds
composed of carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen, which supply the body with its
main source of energy. Carbohydrates
are found in fruits, cereals, and root
crops and fall into 2 groups. These are
available carbohydrates, which are meta-
bolized into glucose for the body＊s use,
and unavailable carbohydrates, such as
cellulose, which cannot be broken down
by digestive  enzymes and make up the
bulk of dietary fibre (see fibre, dietary).
107
CARBOHYDRATES CAPILLARY
C
Ateriole
CAPILLARY NETWORK
CapillaryCapillary wall
Venule
CAPILLARY
SECTION
Cell
nucleus
CAPILLARY108
Available carbohydrates are predomi-
nantly starches (complex carbohydrates)
and  sugars (simple carbohydrates). In
carbohydrate metabolism, the monosac-
charides (simple sugars) glucose (grape
sugar), galactose (a milk sugar), and
fructose (fruit sugar) are absorbed into
the bloodstream unchanged. The disac-
charides (double sugars) sucrose, maltose
and lactose (a milk sugar) are broken
down into simple sugars before they are
absorbed. Starches also have to be bro-
ken down into simple sugars.
Some glucose is burned up immedi-
ately (see metabolism) in order to generate
energy for cells, such as brain cells, that
need a constant supply. Galactose and
fructose have to be converted to glu-
cose in the liver before they can be used
by body cells. Surplus glucose is con-
veyed to the liver, muscles, and fat cells
where it is converted into glycogen and
fat for storage. When blood glucose lev-
els are high, glucose storage is stimulated
by insulin, a hormone that is secreted by
the  pancreas. When the blood glucose
level becomes low, insulin secretion
diminishes and glucagon, which is anoth-
erhormone produced by the pancreas,
stimulates the conversion of stored gly-
cogen to glucose for release into the
bloodstream. Although fat cannot be
converted to glucose, it can be burned
as a fuel in order to conserve glucose.
In the disorder diabetes mellitus, carbo-
hydrate metabolism is disturbed by a
deficiency of insulin.
carbon A nonmetallic element present
in all the fundamental molecules of liv-
ing organisms, such as  proteins,  fats,
and  carbohydrates, and in some inor-
ganic molecules such as carbon dioxide,
carbon monoxide, and  sodium bicarbon-
ate. Pure carbon is the major constituent
of diamond, coal, charcoal, and graphite.
carbon dioxide(CO2) A colourless,
odourless gas. Carbon dioxide is pre-
sent in small amounts in the air and is
an important by-product of metabolism
in cells. It is produced by the breakdown
of substances such as carbohydrates
and fats to produce energy, and is car-
ried in the blood to the lungs and
exhaled. Carbon dioxide helps to control
the rate of respiration: when a  person
exercises, CO2 levels in the bloodrise,
causing the person to breathe more
rapidly in order to expel carbon dioxide
and to take in more oxygen. 
When it is compressed and cooled to 
-75oC, carbon dioxide becomes solid
dry ice, which is used in cryosurgery. 
carbon monoxide(CO) A colourless,
odourless, poisonous gas present in
motor exhaust fumes and produced by
inefficient burning of coal, gas, or oil.
Carbon monoxide binds with  haemo-
globin and prevents the transportation
of oxygen to body tissues. The initial
symptoms of acute high-level carbon
monoxide poisoning are dizziness, head-
ache, nausea, and  faintness. Continued
inhalation of the gas may leadto loss of
consciousness, permanent brain damage,
and even death. Low-level exposure to
carbon monoxide over a period of time
may cause fatigue, nausea, diarrhoea,
abdominal pain, and general malaise.
carbon tetrachloride(CCl4) A colour-
less,  poisonous, volatile chemical with
a characteristic odour that is present in
some home dry-cleaning fluids and in-
dustrial solvents. It can cause dizziness,
confusion, and liver and kidney damage
if it is inhaled or swallowed.
carbuncle A cluster of interconnected
boils, usually caused by the bacterium
STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS. The back of the
neck and the buttocks are common sites.
Carbuncles mainly affect people with
reduced immunity, particularly those with
diabetes mellitus. Treatment is usually
with an  antibiotic and hot  compresses.
Incision and drainage may be necessary
if a carbuncle is persistent.
carcinogen Any agent capable of caus-
ing  cancer. Chemicals are the largest
group of carcinogens. Major types in-
clude polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs), which occur in tobacco smoke,
pitch, tar fumes, and soot. Exposure to
PAHs may lead to cancer of the respira-
tory system or skin. Certain aromatic
amines used in the chemical and rubber
industries may cause bladder cancer
after prolonged exposure.
The best-known physical carcinogen is
high-energy  radiation, such as nuclear
radiation and X-rays. Exposure may cause
cancerous changes in cells, especially in
CARBON CARCINOGEN
C109
cells that divide quickly: for example,
changes in the precursors of white
blood cells in the bone marrow causes
leukaemia. The risk depends on the dos-
age and duration of exposure. Over many
years, exposure to  ultraviolet radiation
in sunlight can cause skin cancer. An-
other known physical carcinogen is
asbestos (see asbestos-related diseases).
Only a few biological agents are known
to cause cancer in humans. SCHISTOSOMA
HAEMATOBIUM, one of the blood flukes
responsible for schistosomiasis, can cause
cancer of the bladder; and  ASPERGILLUS
FLAVUS, a fungus that produces the poi-
son aflatoxin in stored peanuts and grain,
is believed to cause liver cancer. Viruses
associated with cancer include strains
of the human papilloma virus, which
are linked to cancer of the cervix; the
hepatitis B virus, which is linked to liver
cancer; and a type of herpes virus which
is associated with Kaposi's sarcoma. 
carcinogenesis The development of a
cancer caused by the action of carcino-
gens (cancer-causing factors) on normal
cells. Carcinogens are believed to alter
the DNA in cells, particularly in  onco-
genes (genes that control the growth and
division of cells). An altered cell divides
abnormally fast, passing on the genetic
changes to all offspring cells. A group of
cells is established that is not affected by
the body＊s normal restraints on growth. 
carcinoid syndrome A rare condition
caused by an intestinal or lung tumour,
called a carcinoid, which secretes ex-
cess amounts of the hormone serotonin.
Carcinoid syndrome is characterized by
bouts of facial flushing, diarrhoea, and
wheezing, but symptoms usually occur
only if the tumour has spread to the
liver or has arisen in a lung. Sometimes
tumours in the intestine, lung, and, more
rarely, the liver are removed surgically,
but, in most cases, surgery is unlikely to
be of benefit. In these circustances,
symptoms may be relieved by drugs
that block the action of serotonin.
carcinoma Any cancerous tumour (see
cancer) arising from cells in the cover-
ing surface layer or lining membrane of
an organ. The most common cancers
of the lungs, breast, stomach, skin, cervix,
colon and rectum are carcinomas.
carcinoma in situ The earliest, usually
curable, stage of a cancer in which it has
not yet spread from the surface layer of
cells of an organ.
carcinomatosis The presence of can-
cerous tissue in different sites of the
body due to the spread of  cancer cells
from a primary (original) cancerous tu-
mour. Symptoms depend on the site of
the metastases (secondary tumours).
Carcinomatosis may be confirmed by
X-rays or by radionuclide scanning of the
bones and lungs, by biochemical tests,
or during an operation. The condition is
not improved by removing the primary
tumour unless the tumour is producing
a hormone that stimulates the growth
of metastases. Anticancer drugs or radio-
therapy may be given to treat metastases.
cardiac arrest A halt in the pumping
action of the heart that occurs when its
rhythmic muscular activity ceases. The
most common cause of cardiac arrest is
a  myocardial infarction  (heart attack).
Other causes include respiratory arrest,
electrical injury, loss of blood, hypother-
mia, drug overdose, and  anaphylactic
shock. Cardiac arrest causes sudden
collapse, loss of consciousness, and
absence of pulse and breathing. 
The diagnosis is confirmed by moni-
toring the electrical activity of the heart
by ECG. This distinguishes between ven-
tricular fibrillation and asystole, the 2
abnormalities of heart rhythm that cause
cardiac arrest. Ventricular fibrillation may
be corrected by  defibrillation. Asystole,
the complete absence of heart muscle
activity, is more difficult to reversebut
may respond to injection of adrenaline.
cardiac cycle The sequence of events,
lasting for less than a second, that make
up each beat of the heart. A heartbeat has
3 phases. In diasystole, the heart relaxes.
During atrial systole, the atria contract,
and in ventricular systole, the ventricles
contract. The sinoatrial node (the heart＊s
pacemaker) regulates the timing of the
phases by sending electrical impulses
to the atria and ventricles. 
cardiac massage See cardiopulmonary
resuscitation.
cardiac neurosis Excessive anxiety about
the condition of the heart, usuallyfol-
lowing a  myocardial infarction (heart
CARDIAC NEUROSIS CARCINOGENESIS
C110
attack) or heart surgery but sometimes
occurring when there is no previous heart
trouble. The person experiences symp-
toms, such as breathlessness and chest
pain, that are typical of heart disease, and
may be reluctant to exercise or work for
fear of an attack. Medical investigation
reveals no physical cause. Psychothera-
py may be of benefit.
cardiac output The measured volume of
blood pumped by the heart each minute,
used to assess how efficiently the heart is
working. At rest, a healthy adult＊s heart
pumps 2.5每4.5 litres of blood per minute;
during exercise this figure may be as
much as 30 litres per minute. A low out-
put during exercise indicates damage to
the heart muscle or major blood loss. 
cardiac stress test One of a group of
tests used to assess the function of the
heart in people who experience chest
pain, breathlessness, or palpitations dur-
ing exercise. The test establishes whether
the patient has coronary artery disease.
An  ECG machine records the patterns
of the heart＊s electrical activity while the
heart is stressed. This is usually achieved
by the patient exercising on a treadmill
or cycling. Specific changes in the elec-
trical pattern as exercise levels increase
indicate  angina. Cardiac stress testing
may be used in conjunction with radio-
nuclide scanning to identify damaged
areas of heart muscle.
cardiology The study of the function of
the heart and the investigation, diagno-
sis, and medical treatment of disorders
of the heart and blood vessels.
cardiomegaly Enlargement of the heart.
Cardiomegaly may take the form of
hypertrophy (thickening) of the heart
muscle or of dilatation (increase in 
volume) of 1 or more of the heart cham-
bers. Hypertrophy occurs in conditions
in which the heart has to work harder
than normal to pump blood around the
body. These include  hypertension,  pul-
monary hypertension, and one type of
cardiomyopathy. Dilatation of a heart
chamber may be due to heart valve
incompetence (failure of a valve to
close properly after a contraction) such
as occurs in aortic insufficiency. 
Symptoms may not occur until the
heart has enlarged to the point where it
cannot cope with additional stress. Its
reduced pumping efficiency leads to
heart failure, with symptoms of breath-
lessness and ankle swelling. Cardiomegaly
is diagnosed by physical examination,
chest X-ray, and  ECG. Treatment is
directed at the underlying cause. 
cardiomyopathy Any disease of the
heart muscle that weakens the force of
cardiac contractions, thereby reducing the
efficiency of blood circulation. Cardio-
myopathies may have an infectious,
metabolic, nutritional, toxic, autoimmune,
or degenerative cause. However, in many
cases the cause is unknown.
There are 3 main types. In hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, which is usually inher-
ited, the heart muscle is abnormally
thickened. In dilated cardiomyopathy,
metabolism of the heart muscle cells is
abnormal and the walls of the heart
tend to balloon out under pressure.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is caused by
scarring of the endocardium (the inner
lining of the heart) or by amyloidosis.
Symptoms of cardiomyopathy include
fatigue, chest pain, and palpitations.
The condition may lead to heart failure,
symptoms of which include breathing
difficulty and oedema. A chestX-ray may
show enlargement of the heart, and
echocardiography may show thickened
heart muscle. A biopsy of heart muscle
may reveal muscle cell abnormalities. 
Symptoms may be treated with diuretic
drugs to control heart failure and  anti-
arrhythmic drugs to correct abnormal
heart rhythm. In many cases, heart mus-
cle function deteriorates, and the only
remaining option is a heart transplant.
cardiopulmonary bypass The method
by which the circulation of blood around
the body is maintained while the heart is
stopped during heart surgery. A  heart每
lung machine is used to maintain the
supply of oxygenated blood to the body.
cardiopulmonary resuscitation The
administration of life-saving measures
to a person who has suffered a  cardiac
arrest. A person in cardiac arrest is not
breathing and has no detectable pulse or
heartbeat.First, mouth-to-mouth resus-
citation (see artificial respiration) is given;
if this fails to restart breathing, repeated
chest  compressions, using the  heel of
CARDIAC OUTPUTCARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION
C111
the hand, are applied to the lowerbreast-
bone until trained help arrives.  Both
these measures are used to restore
blood circulation to the brain. Brain
damage is likely if the brain is starved of
oxygen for more than 3每4 minutes. 
cardiotocography See fetal heart mon-
itoring.
cardiovascular Pertaining to the heart
and blood vessels.
cardiovascular disorders Disorders
of the heart, blood vessels, and blood
circulation (see heart disorders; arteries,
disorders of; veins, disorders of). 
cardiovascular surgery The branch
of surgery concerned with the heart and
blood vessels. Cardiovascular surgery
includes operations to prevent or repair
damage caused, for example, by con-
genital heart disease (see heart disease,
congenital), atherosclerosis, or a myocar-
dial infarction (heart attack). Procedures
include  heart valve surgery,  coronary
artery bypass, and heart transplant.
cardioversion An alternative name for
defibrillation.
carditis A general term for inflammation
of any part of the heart or its linings.
There are 3 types of carditis: myocarditis
(inflammation of the heart muscle),
which is usually caused by a viral infec-
tion;  endocarditis  (inflammation of the
internal lining of the heart), which is
usually due to a bacterial infection; and
pericarditis (inflammation of the outer
covering of the heart), which is usually
due to a viral or bacterial infection but
may be associated with a  myocardial
infarction or an autoimmune disorder,
such as systemic lupus erythematosus. 
caries, dental Tooth decay; the gradual
erosion of enamel (the covering of the
tooth) and dentine (the substance be-
neath the enamel). Initial decay usually
occurs on the grinding surfaces of the
back teeth and areas around the gum
line. The main cause is plaque, a sticky
substance consisting of food deposits,
saliva by-products, and bacteria that
collects on the teeth. The breakdown of
food deposits by bacteria creates an
acid that eats into the enamel to form
cavities. Unchecked decay spreadsto the
dentine, and as the cavity enlarges, bac-
teria may invade and destroy the pulp
at the tooth's core. Advanced decay
causes toothache and bad breath. 
Treatment consists of drilling away the
area of decay and filling the cavity (see
filling, dental). In advanced decay, it may
be necessary to remove the infected
pulp (see extraction, dental).
Water fluoridation and the use of fluo-
ride toothpaste helps prevent caries. The
risk of caries is also reduced by cutting
sugar consumption, practising good oral
hygiene, and visiting the dentist regularly.
carotenaemia A harmless condition in
which the blood level of the orange pig-
ment  carotene, found in carrots and
other vegetables, is excessively high.
The condition may cause temporary yel-
lowing of the skin. 
carotene An orange pigment found in
carrots, tomatoes, and leafy green veg-
etables. The most important form, called
beta-carotene, is an  antioxidant that is
converted in the intestines into vitamin A,
which is essential for vision and the
health of the skin and other organs.
Excessive intake of foods containing
carotene may result in carotenaemia.
carotid artery Any of the main arteries
of the neck and head. There are 2 com-
mon carotid arteries (left and right),
each of which divides into 2 main
branches (internal and external). 
The left carotid arises from the  aorta
and runs up the neck on the left side of
the trachea (windpipe). The right carotid
arises from the subclavian artery (which
branches off the aorta) and follows a
similar route on the right side of the
CAROTID ARTERY   CARDIOTOCOGRAPHY
C
Internal
carotid
artery
External
carotid
artery
Common
carotid
artery
CAROTIDARTERY112
neck. Just above the level of the  larynx
(voice-box), each carotid artery divides to
form an external carotid artery and an in-
ternal carotid artery. The external arteries
have multiple branches that supply most
tissues in the face, scalp, mouth, and jaws;
the internal arteries enter the skull to
supply the brain and eyes. At the base of
the brain, branches of the 2 internal ca-
rotids and the basilar artery join to form
a ring of vessels called the circle of Willis.
Narrowing of these vessels may be as-
sociated with  transient ischaemic  attack
(TIA); obstruction of them causes a stroke.
carpal tunnel syndrome Numbness,
tingling, and pain in the thumb, index
finger, and middle fingers caused by
compression of the median nerve at the
wrist. Symptoms may be worse at night.
The condition results from pressure on
the nerve where it passes into the hand
via a gap (the ※carpal tunnel＊＊) under a
ligament at the front of the wrist. It is
common among keyboard users. It also
occurs without obvious cause in middle-
aged women, and is associated with
pregnancy, initial use of oral contracep-
tives, premenstrual syndrome, rheumatoid
arthritis, myxoedema, and acromegaly. 
The condition often disappears without
treatment. Persistent symptoms may be
treated with a corticosteroid drug injected
under the ligament, or the ligament may
be cut to relieve pressure on the nerve.
carpus The 8 bones of the wrist.
carrier A person who is able to pass on
an infectious or inherited disease with-
out actually suffering from it. 
car sickness  See
motion sickness.
cartilage A type
of connective tissue
made up of varying
amounts of the gel-
like substance colla-
gen. Cartilage forms
animportant struc-
tural component of
various parts of the
skeletal system, in-
cluding the  joints.
There are 3 main
types. Hyaline car-
tilage is a tough,
smooth tissue that
lines the surfaces of joints. Fibrocarti-
lage is solid and strong and makes up
the intervertebral discs that are situated
between the bones of the spine and the
shock-absorbing pads in joints. Elastic
cartilage is soft and rubbery and found
in structures such as the outer ear and
the epiglottis.
cast A rigid casing applied to a limb or
other part of the body to hold a broken
bone or dislocated joint in position as it
heals. Most casts are made of bandages,
impregnated with plaster of Paris, which
are applied wet and harden as they dry. 
castor oil A colourless or yellow-tinged
oil obtained from the leaves of the cas-
tor oil plant. Given orally, castor oil has
a laxative action. Zinc and castor oil are
combined in a soothing ointment for
conditions such as nappy rash.
castration The removal of the testes
(see  orchidectomy). The term is some-
times used for removal of the ovaries
(see  oophorectomy). Castration is per-
formed when organs are diseased or to
reduce the level of testosterone or of
oestrogen in people who have certain
types of cancer that are stimlated by
these hormones. 
catabolism A chemical process by
which constituents of food stored in the
body (for example, fats) are broken
down, releasing energy into body cells
(see biochemistry; metabolism).
catalepsy A physical state in which the
muscles of the face, body, and limbs are
maintained in a semi-rigid, statue-like
position for minutes, hours, or even days.
Catalepsy occurs in people with schizo-
phrenia or  epilepsy, but may also be
caused by brain disease or some drugs.
cataplexy A sudden loss of muscle tone,
causing an involuntary collapse without
loss of consciousness. Cataplexy is trig-
gered by intense emotion, particularly
laughter, and occurs almost exclusively
in those suffering from  narcolepsy and
other sleep disorders.
cataract Loss of transparency of the
crystalline  lens of the eye, due to
changes in its delicate protein fibres. At
an advanced stage, the front part of the
lens becomes densely opaque, but the
cataract never causes total blindness.
Almost everyone over 65 has some
CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME CATARACT
C
CARTILAGE
Bone
Synovial
fluid
Synovial
membrane
Hyaline
cartilage
Ligament
JOINTdegree of cataract. Regular exposure to
ultraviolet light increases the risk. Other
causes include injury to the eye, partic-
ularly if a foreign body enters the lens.
Cataract is common in people who have
diabetes mellitus. Long-term use of cor-
ticosteroid drugs may contributeto
cataract development.  Congenital catar-
actmay be due to an infection of the
mother in early pregnancy, especially
with rubella, to the toxic effects of certain
drugs in pregnancy, or be associated
with Down＊s syndrome or galactosaemia.
Onset of symptoms is almost imper-
ceptible, although night driving may be
affected early on. There is slow, progres-
sive loss of visual acuity. The person may
become  shortsighted and notice distur-
bances in colour perception. When vision
has become seriously impaired, cataract
surgery is performed to remove the lens.
cataract surgery Removal of the  lens
from the eye, performed to restore sight
in people whose vision is impaired by a
cataract. The lens is usually replaced
with a plastic implant during the opera-
tion, although for young people and
those with other eye disorders, a con-
tact or spectacle lens fitted after the
operation may be preferable.
catarrh Excessive secretion of mucus by
the mucous membranes lining the nose
(see  rhinitis), sinuses (see  sinusitus), or
upper air passages, due to inflammation.
catatonia A state in which a person be-
comes mute or adopts a bizarre, rigid
pose. It is seen in a rare form of  schizo-
phrenia and some types of brain disease.
catharsis A term meaning purification
or cleansing. Catharsis is used to refer
to the process of cleaning out the bowels.
Sigmund Freud used the term in psycho-
analytic theory to describe the expression
of repressed feelings and memories.
cathartic A term that means having the
power to purify or cleanse. A cathartic
drug stimulates movement of the bow-
els (see laxative drugs). 
catheter A flexible tube inserted into
the body to drain or introduce fluids or
carry out other functions. Catheters are
commonly used to drain urine from the
bladder (see  catheterization, urinary).
Other types are used to investigate the
condition of the heart (see catheterization,
113
cardiac), to widen obstructed bloodves-
sels, or to control bleeding. (See also
balloon catheter.)
catheterization, cardiac A diagnostic
test in which a fine, sterile  catheter  is
introduced into the heart via a blood
vessel. It is used to diagnose and assess
the extent of congenital heart disease
(see heart disease, congenital) and coro-
nary artery disease, and to diagnose and
treat some disorders of the heart valves
(see valvuloplasty). During the procedure,
the pressure within the heart＊s chambers
can be measured, samples of blood and
tissue can be taken, and a  radiopaque
substance can be injected to allow the
heart＊s cavities to be X-rayed. 
catheterization, urinary Insertion of
a sterile  catheter into the  bladder to
drain urine. The procedure is used when
a person is unable to empty the bladder
normally or is incontinent (see  inconti-
nence, urinary). Urinary catheterization
is also used during operations, in blad-
der function tests such as  cystometry
and cystourethrography, and to monitor
urine production in the critically ill. 
CAT scanning An abbreviation for com-
puterized axial tomographic scanning,
commonly known as CT scanning.
cat-scratch fever An uncommon dis-
ease that develops after a scratch or
bite by a cat. Three quarters of cases
occur in children. The fever is due to
infection with a small bacterium called
ROCHALIMAEA HENDELAE. The main symp-
tom, appearing after 3每10 days, is a
swollen lymph node near the bite or
scratch. The node may become painful
and tender, and an infected blister may
develop at the site of the injury. A fever,
rash, and headache may occur. Diagno-
sis is confirmed by  biopsy of the
swollen lymph node and a skin test.
Analgesic drugs  (painkillers) may be
used to relieve the fever and headache. 
cats, diseases from  Various parasites
and infectious organisms can spread
from cats to humans. The most serious
disease is rabies. Cat-scratch fever is an
uncommon illness caused by infection
with the bacterium ROCHALIMAEA HENDE-
LAE following a cat scratch or bite. Cats
commonly carry the protozoan TOXOPLAS-
MA GONDII, which causes  toxoplasmosis.
CATS, DISEASES FROM CATARACT SURGERY
CInfection, usually from contact with cat＊s
faeces, is not generally serious but has
serious consequences if a woman is in-
fected during pregnancy. Cat faeces may
also carry eggs of the cat roundworm, a
possible cause of  toxocariasis. Rarely,
a larva from an ingested roundworm egg
migrates to and lodges in an eye, causing
deterioration of vision or even blindness.
Children who have been playing in sand
or soil contaminated by cat faeces are
most commonly affected. Other cat-relat-
eddisorders in humans include  tinea
(ringworm), fungal infections of the skin,
bites from cat fleas, and allergic reac-
tions to dander that may cause asthma
or  urticaria. Diseases from cats can be
avoided by good hygiene, veterinary
care for animals that are ill, and regular
worming and flea treatment of cats.
cauda equina A ※spray＊＊ of nerve roots
resembling a horse＊s tail that descends
from the lower spinal cord and occupies
the lower 3rd of the spinal canal. 
caudal Relating to the lower end of the
spine. Caudal means ※of the tail§.
caudal block A type of  nerve block, in
which a local anaesthetic is injected
into the lower part of the spinal canal.
Caudal block may be used for obstetric
and gynaecological procedures.
cauliflower ear A painful, swollen dis-
tortion of the pinna (ear flap) resulting
from blows or friction that have caused
bleeding in the soft cartilage. Immediate
treatment after an injury is with ice-
packs to reduce the swelling. In severe
cases, a doctor may drain blood from
the ear and apply a pressure bandage.
causalgia A persistent, burning pain,
usually in an arm or leg, most often as a
result of injury to a nerve by a deep cut,
limb  fracture, or gunshot wound. The
skin overlying the painful area may be
red and tender, or blue, cold, and clammy.
Causalgia may be aggravated by light
sensations, such as touch, or emotional
factors. In some cases, treatment with
antidepressant drugs or  anticonvulsant
drugs may be effective. A few people
benefit from  sympathectomy, an opera-
tion in which nerves are severed.
caustic  A term used for any substance
that has a burning or corrosive action
on body tissues or has a burning taste. 
114
Caustic agents such as silver nitrate are
used to destroy warts.
cauterization The application of a heat-
ed instrument to destroy tissues, to stop
bleeding, or to promote healing, used
in conditions such as haemorrhoids and
cervical erosion. Cauterization has been
largely replaced by electrocoagulation.
cavernous sinus thrombosis Block-
age of a venous  sinus (a channel for
venous blood deep in the skull behind
an eye socket) by a thrombus (abnormal
blood clot). The condition is usually a
complication of a bacterial infection in an
area drained by the veins entering the
sinus. Such infections include  cellulitis
of the face, infections of the mouth, eye,
or middle ear, sinusitis, and septicaemia. 
Symptoms include severe headache,
high fever, pain and loss of sensation in
and above the affected eye, and propto-
sis (protrusion of the eyeball). Vision
may become blurred and eye move-
ments paralysed due to pressure on the
optic nerve and other cranial nerves.
Treatment with antibiotic drugs and anti-
coagulant drugs can save vision. Left
untreated, blindness results, and the
infection may prove fatal.
cavity, dental A hole in a tooth, com-
monly caused by dental caries (see
caries, dental).
CD4 count A blood test used to monitor
HIVinfection and  AIDS.The procedure
counts the number of CD4  lymphocytes
(white blood cells responsible for fight-
ing infection) in a blood sample. CD4
lymphocytes are destroyed by HIV, and
reduced levels of these cells indicate
the progression of HIV and the eventual
development of AIDS.
cefaclor A common antibiotic, one of
the cephalosporin drugs.
cefadroxil A  cephalosporin drug, used
to treat bacterial infections.
cefalexin A cephalosporin drug, used to
treat bacterial infections.
cefotaxime A  cephalosporin drug, used
to treat bacterial infections.
cefuroxime A cephalosporin drug, used
to treat bacterial infections.
celecoxib A  COX-2 inhibitor drug  (a
type of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drug) used to relieve the pain and
inflammation of  rheumatoid arthritis
CAUDA EQUINA CELECOXIB
C115
and osteoarthritis. Side effects include
nausea and diarrhoea. Gastrointestinal
discomfort may also occur, but can be
minimized by taking the drug with food.
cell The basic structural unit of all living
organisms. The human body consists of
billions of cells, structurally and function-
ally integrated to perform the complex
tasks necessary for life. In spite of varia-
tion in size and function, most human
cells have a similar basic structure. 
Each cell is an invisibly small bag con-
taining liquid cytoplasm, surrounded by
a cell membrane that regulates the pas-
sage of useful substances (such as oxygen
and nutrients) into the cell; and waste
materials (such as carbon dioxide) and
manufactured substances (such as hor-
mones) out of the cell. Some cells, such
as those lining the small intestine, have
microvilli, projections that increase the
cells＊ surface area to facilitate absorption.
All cells, except red blood cells, have a
nucleus, a control centre that governs
all major cell activities by regulating the
amount and types of proteins made in the
cell. Inside the nucleus are the chromo-
somes, which are made of the nucleic
acid DNA. This contains the instructions
for  protein synthesis, which are carried
into the cytoplasm by a type of  RNA,
another nucleic acid, and are decoded in
particles called ribosomes. The nucleus
also contains a spherical structure called
the nucleolus, which plays a role in the
production of ribosomes.
The cell also contains various organ-
elles, each with a specific role. Energy is
generated from the breakdown of sug-
ars and fatty acids by mitochondria.
Substances that would damage the cell
if they came into contact with the cyto-
plasm are contained in particles called
lysosomes and peroxisomes. A system
of membranes in the cytoplasm called
the endoplasmic reticulum transports
materials through the cell. Flattened
sacs called the Golgi complex receive
and process proteins dispatched by the
endoplasmic reticulum. Products for
export, such as enzymes and hormones,
are secreted by vesicles at the cell sur-
face. Other materials, water, and waste
products are transported and stored in
the cytoplasm by vacuoles. The cyto-
plasm itself has a network of fine tubes
(microtubules) and filaments (microfil-
aments) known as the cytoskeleton,
which gives the cell a definite shape.
cell division The processes by which
cells multiply. Mitosis  is the most com-
mon form of cell division, giving rise to
CELL DIVISION CELL
C
CELL
Nucleus
Centrioles
Mitochondrion
Ribosomes
Golgi
complex
Nucleolus Microvilli
Lysosome
Cell
membrane
Vacuole
Vesicle
Peroxisome
Cytoskeleton
Endoplasmic
reticulum116
daughter cells identical to the parent
cells. Meiosis produces egg (see ovum)
and  sperm cells that differ from their
parent cells in that they have only half
the normal number of chromosomes.
cellulitis A bacterial infection of the skin
and the tissues beneath it, usually affect-
ing the  face, neck, or legs. Cellulitis is
most commonly caused by streptococci
bacteria, which enter the skin via a
wound. The affected area is hot, tender,
and red, and there may be fever and
chills. Untreated cellulitis at the site of a
wound may progress to bacteraemia and
septicaemia or, occasionally, to gangrene.
Cellulitis is usually more severe in peo-
ple with reduced immune response, such
as those with diabetes mellitus or an
immunodeficiency disorder. Treatment is
with an antibiotic such as a penicillin drug
or erythromycin. (See also erysipelas.) 
celsius scale A temperature scale in
which the melting point of ice is zero
degrees (0∼C) and the boiling point of
water is 100 degrees (100∼C). On this
scale, normal body temperature is 37∼C.
(See also Fahrenheit scale.)
cementum Bone-like tissue surround-
ing the root of a tooth (see teeth).
centigrade scale The obsolete name
for the celsius scale.
central nervous system The anatomi-
cal term for the  brain and  spinal cord,
often abbreviated as CNS. The central
nervous system is made up of neurons
(nerve cells) and works in tandem with
the  peripheral nervous system (PNS),
which carries signals between the CNS
and the rest of the body. The CNS is
responsible for receiving sensory infor-
mation from organs such as the eyes
and ears, analysing it, and then initiat-
ing an appropriate motor response. (See
also nervous system.) 
centrifuge A machine that separates
the different components of a body fluid
for analysis. When a fluid such as blood
is spun at high speed around a central
axis, groups of particles of varying den-
sity, for example red and white blood
cells, are separated by centrifugal force. 
cephalexin An alternative spelling of
cefalexin, a common cephalosporin drug. 
cephalhaematoma An extensive, soft
swelling on the scalp of a newborn infant,
which is  caused by bleeding into the
space between the  cranium and its
fibrous covering due to pressure on the
baby＊s head during delivery. The swelling
is not serious and gradually subsides.
cephalic Relating to the head, as in
cephalic presentation, the head-first
position of a baby in the birth canal.
cephalopelvic disproportion A com-
plication of childbirth (see  childbirth,
complications of) in which the mother＊s
pelvis is too narrow in proportion to the
size of the baby＊s head.
cephalosporin drugs A large group of
antibiotic drugs derived from the fungus
CEPHALOSPORIUM ACREMONIUM, which are
effective against a wide range of infec-
tions. Cephalosporins are used to treat
ear, throat, and respiratory tract infec-
tions, and conditions, such as  urinary
tract infections and gonorrhoea, in which
the causative bacteria are resistant to
other types of antibiotics. Occasionally,
the drugs cause allergic reactions, such
as rash, itching, and fever. Rarely, anaphy-
lactic shock occurs. Other side effects
include diarrhoea and blood disorders. 
cerebellar ataxia Jerky, staggering gait
and other uncoordinated movements
caused by a disease of or damage to 
the  cerebellum. Other features include
dysarthria (slurred speech), hand tremor,
and  nystagmus (abnormal jerky eye
movements). Possible causes include
stroke, multiple sclerosis, a brain tumour,
damage caused by alcohol dependence,
and degeneration of the cerebellum due
to an inherited disorder.
cerebellum A region of the brain behind
the brainstem concerned with maintain-
ing posture and balance and coordinating
movement. The cerebellum is situated
behind the  brainstem and has 2 hemi-
spheres. From the inner side of each
hemisphere arise 3 nerve fibre stalks,
which link up with different parts of the
brainstem and carry signals between
the cerebellum and the rest of the
brain. Nerve fibres from these stalks fan
out towards the deep folds of the cortex
(outer part) of each brain hemisphere,
which consists of layers of grey matter.
Information about the body＊s posture
and the state of contraction or relax-
ation in its muscles is conveyed from
CELLULITIS CEREBELLUM
Cmuscle tendons and the labyrinth in the
inner ear via the brainstem to the cere-
bellum. Working with the basal ganglia
(nerve cell clusters deep within the
brain), the cerebellum uses this data to
fine tune messages sent to muscles
from the motor cortex in the cerebrum.
cerebral haemorrhage Bleeding within
the brain due to a ruptured blood vessel
(see intracerebral haemorrhage; stroke).
cerebral palsy A disorder of posture
and movement resulting from damage
to a child＊s developing brain before,
during, or immediately after birth, or in
early childhood. Cerebral palsy is non-
progressive and varies in degree from
slight clumsiness of hand movement
and gait to complete immobility.
A child with cerebral palsy may have
spastic paralysis (abnormal stiffness of
muscles), athetosis (involuntary writhing
movements), or ataxia (loss of coordina-
tion and balance). Other nervous system
disorders, such as hearing defects or
epileptic seizures, may be present. About
70 per cent of affected  children have
mental impairment, but the remainder
are of normal or high intelligence. 
In most cases, damage  occurs before
or at birth, most commonly as a result
of an inadequate supply of oxygen to the
brain. More rarely, the cause is a mater-
nal infection spreading to the baby in
the uterus. In rare cases, cerebral palsy
is due to  kernicterus. Possible causes
after birth include encephalitis, meningitis,
head injury, or intracerebral haemorrhage.
Cerebral palsy may not be recognized
until well into the baby＊s 1st year. Ini-
tially, the infant may have hypotonic
(floppy) muscles, be difficult to feed, and
show delay in sitting without support. 
Although there is no cure for cerebral
palsy, much can be done to help affected
children using specialized physiotherapy,
speech therapy,  andtechniques and
devices for nonverbal communication. 
cerebral thrombosis The formation of
a  thrombus (blood clot) in an artery in
the brain. The clot may block the artery,
cutting off the supply of blood, nutri-
ents, and oxygen to a region of the
brain, causing a stroke. 
cerebrospinal fluid A clear, watery fluid
that circulates between the ventricles
117
(cavities) within the  brain, the central
canal in the  spinal cord, and the space
between the brain and spinal cord and
their protective coverings, the meninges.
Cerebrospinal fluid functions as a shock-
absorber, helping to prevent or reduce
damage to the brain and spinal cord
after a blow to the head or back. It con-
tains glucose, proteins, salts, and white
blood cells. Examination of the fluid, usu-
ally obtained by lumbar puncture, is used
to diagnose disorders such as meningitis.
cerebrovascular accident Sudden rup-
ture or blockage of a blood vessel in the
brain, causing serious bleeding and/or
local obstruction to blood circulation,
and leading to a stroke. Blockage may be
due to thrombosis or embolism. Rupture
of vessels may cause intracerebral haem-
orrhage or subarachnoid haemorrhage. 
cerebrovascular disease Any disease
affecting an artery in, and supplying
blood to, the brain: for example, athero-
sclerosis (narrowing of the arteries) or
defects or weaknesses in arterial walls
causing aneurysm (a balloon-like swelling
in an artery). The disease may eventually
cause a cerebrovascular accident, which
commonly leads to a  stroke. Extensive
narrowing of blood vessels throughout
the brain can be a cause of dementia.
cerebrum The largest and most devel-
oped part of the brain, the site of most
conscious and intelligent activities. Its
main components are 2 large cerebral
hemispheres that grow out from the
upper part of the  brainstem. Their sur-
face is made up of a series of folds
called gyri, separated by fissures called
sulci, with a deep longitudinal fissure
separating the 2 hemispheres. The 4
main surface regions of each hemi-
sphere 每 the frontal, parietal, temporal,
and occipital lobes 每 are named after
their overlying bones. Each hemisphere
has a central cavity, called a  ventricle,
filled with  cerebrospinal fluid. This is
surrounded by an inner layer, consisting
of clusters of nerve cells called the
basal ganglia. A middle layer of ※white
matter§ is composed mainly of nerve
fibres, which carry information between
specific areas of the cortex and between
areas of the cortex, central brain, and
the  brainstem. A thick band of fibres
CEREBRUM CEREBRAL HAEMORRHAGE
Ccervical cancer See cervix, cancer of.
cervical dysplasia Changes in the sur-
face cells of the cervix that may become
cancerous. There are 3 grades of cervical
dysplasia, mild, moderate, and severe,
based on the severity of the changes seen
in cells obtained from a  cervical smear
test. Abnormalities can also be classified
as grades of cervical intraepithelial neo-
plasia.In mild dysplasia, abnormal cells
mayreturn to a normal state without
treatment; severe dysplasia, left untreat-
ed,may progress to cervical cancer (see
cervix, cancer of). 
The cause of cervical dysplasia is not
known, but risk factors include smoking
and unprotected sex at an early age or
with many partners. Treatment depends
on the severity of the condition. For mild
or moderate dysplasia,  laser treatment,
freezing, or  colposcopy may be used to
destroy the abnormal cells. Alternative-
ly, the cells may be surgically removed.
If the dysplasia is severe, an area of the
cervix is removed (see cone biopsy).  
cervical erosion A condition affecting
the  cervix in which a layer of mucus-
forming cells more characteristic of
those found in the inner lining of the
cervix appear on its outside surface. The
eroded cervix has a fragile, reddened
area on the surface. Usually, there are
no symptoms, but some women experi-
ence bleeding at unexpected times and
may have a vaginal discharge.
Cervical erosion may be present from
birth. Other causes include injury to the
cervix during labour and long-term use
of  oral contraceptives. The condition is
often detected during a routine cervical
118
called the corpus callosum carries nerve
signals between the 2 hemispheres.
The outer surface layer of each hemi-
sphere is the cerebral cortex 每 the ※grey
matter＊＊, where much of the sensory
information from organs such as the eyes
and ears is processed. Specific sensory
processing takes place in separate
regions. For example, visual perception
is located in a part of the occipital lobe
called the visual cortex. 
The cortex also contains ※motor＊＊ areas
concerned with the initiation of signals
for movement by the skeletal muscles.
Linked to the sensory and motor areas
of the cortex are association areas,
which integrate information from vari-
ous senses and also perform functions
such as comprehension and recognition,
memory storage and recall, thought and
decision making. Some of these cortical
functions are localized to one ※domi-
nant＊＊ hemisphere (the left in almost all
right-handed and many left-handed peo-
ple). Two  clearly defined areas in the
dominant hemisphere are Wernicke＊s
area, responsible for the comprehen-
sion of words, and Broca＊s area, which
is concerned with language expression.
certification An old term for procedures
to commit a person to be compulsorily
detained for mental health treatment. 
cerumen The substance commonly
called earwax. 
cervical Relating to the neck or to the
cervix.
CERTIFICATION CERVICAL EROSION
C
CERVICAL EROSION
LOCATION
Cervix
Extended
lining Vagina
Lining of 
cervical canal
CEREBRUM
Occipital lobe
Temporal
lobe
Cerebrum
Cerebellum
Brain stem
Parietal
lobe
Frontal
lobe119
smear test.Only women who have symp-
toms need treatment. Abnormal tissue
may be destroyed using  cauterization,
cryosurgery, diathermy, or laser treatment. 
cervical incompetence Abnormal weak-
ness of the  cervix that can result in
recurrent miscarriages. An incompetent
cervix may gradually widen under the
weight of the fetus from about the 12th
week of pregnancy onwards, or may sud-
denly open during the second trimester.
The condition is detected by an internal
examination or by ultrasound scanning.
Treatment is with a suture (stitch)
applied like a purse string around the
cervix during the 4th month of pregnan-
cy. The suture is left in position until
the pregnancy is at or near full term and
is then cut to allow the mother to deliv-
er the baby normally.
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia Also
known as CIN, abnormalities in the cells
of the cervix which may become cancer-
ous. The CIN grading system is used to
distinguish levels of change in the sur-
face cells of the cervix in biopsy samples
taken during colposcopy, a procedure us-
ually performed following an abnormal
cervical smear test. Grades CIN 1每3 broad-
ly correspond to mild to severe cervical
dysplasia in cells obtainedfrom a smear. 
cervical mucus method A form of
contraception based on identifying
periods for abstinence from intercourse
according to the changes in the mucus
secreted by a woman＊s cervix (see con-
traception, natural methods of).
cervical osteoarthritis A degenerative
disorder, also known as cervical spon-
dylitis, that affects the joints between
the cervical vertebrae (bones in the neck).
Cervical osteoarthritis mainly affects
middle-aged and elderly people, but
occasionally the degeneration begins
earlier due to an injury.
Symptoms of cervical osteoarthritis
may include pain and stiffness in the
neck, pain in the arms and shoulders,
numbness and tingling in the hands,
and a weak grip. Other symptoms such
as dizziness, unsteadiness, and double
vision when turning the head may also
occur. Rarely, pressure on the spinal
cord can cause weakness or paralysis in
the legs and loss of bladder control. 
Treatments include  heat treatment and
analgesics.  Physiotherapy may improve
neck posture and movement. Pressure
on the spinal cord may be relieved by
surgery (see decompression, spinal canal).
cervical rib A congenital abnormality in
which the lowest of the 7 cervical verte-
brae (neck bones) has overdeveloped to
form an extra  rib parallel to and above
the 1st normal rib. Symptoms may occur
if the rib begins to press on the lower
brachial plexus  (the group of nerves
passing from the spinal cord into the
arm), causing pain, numbness, and pins-
and-needles in the forearm and hand.
Exercises to strengthen the shoulder
muscles and improve posture may bring
relief. Severe or persistent symptoms
may require surgery to remove the rib.
cervical smear test A test to detect
cervical dysplasia (abnormal changes in
the cells of the cervix)that could devel-
op into cervical cancer (see cervix, cancer
of).A smear test also detects viral infec-
tions of the cervix, such as  herpes
simplex and papilloma (see warts, geni-
tal). The test should be carried out 6
months after a woman starts to have
sexual intercourse, with a repeat test 6每12
months later, and then every 3 years.
A sample of cells is taken from the
surface of the cervix using a spatula and
examined under a microscope. If cells
appear normal, nothing further needs to
be done. If cells show dysplasia, further
investigations may be required.
cervical spondylosis An alternative
name for cervical osteoarthritis.
cervicitis Inflammation of the  cervix,
usually due to an infection, such as gon-
orrhoea, chlamydial infections, or genital
herpes (see  herpes, genital). Cervical
infection may follow injury to the cervix
during childbirth or surgery. The acute
form of cervicitis often does not pro-
duce symptoms, although there may be
a discharge from the inflamed cervix.
The chronic form may produce a vaginal
discharge, irregular bleeding from the
vagina, and pain low in the abdomen.
Untreated cervicitis can spread to cause
endometritis, salpingitis, or pelvic inflam-
matory disease. If cervicitis is present in
the mother, her baby may be infected
during delivery resulting in  neonatal
CERVICITIS CERVICAL INCOMPETENCE
C120
ophthalmia or, less commonly, pneumo-
nia due to chlamydial infection.
Treatment is with  antibiotics or with
antiviral drugs. If symptoms persist, the
inflamed area of cervix may be cauter-
ized by  electrocoagulation,  cryotherapy,
or laser treatment.
cervix A small, cylindrical organ compris-
ingthe lower part and neck of the uterus
and separating the body and cavity of
the uterus from the vagina. The fibrous
and smooth muscle tissue of the cervix
creates a form of sphincter, which can
stretch during pregnancy and childbirth. 
The cervical canal runs through the
cervix and allows the passage of blood
during menstruation and of sperm from
the vagina into the uterus; it also forms
part of the birth canal during childbirth.
After puberty, mucus is secreted from
the glandular cells in the canal to assist
sperm entry into the upper cervix. 
cervix, cancer of One of the most com-
mon cancers affecting women worldwide.
Cancer of the  cervix has well-defined
precancerous stages (see  cervical dys-
plasia) that can be detected by a cervical
smear test,allowing, in many cases, early
treatment and a complete cure. Un-
treated, cancer of the cervix may spread
to the organs in the pelvis. 
There are 2 main types of cervical can-
cer: the squamous type is the most
common and is thought to be associated
with the human papilloma virus, acquired
during sexual intercourse.  Factors that
predispose to this type of cancer are
smoking, starting to have sex at an early
age, and having many sexual  partners.
The second, rarer, type of cervical cancer,
adenocarcinoma, sometimes occurs in
women who have never had sexual
intercourse. Its causes are unclear.
Symptoms do not develop until the
condition is advanced, when there is
vaginal bleeding or a bloodstained dis-
charge at unexpected times, and pain if
the cancer has spread within the pelvis.
Following an abnormal smear test
result, colposcopy or a cone biopsy may
be carried out to diagnose the condition.
A localized early cancer may be destroyed
by  electrocoagulation,  diathermy,  laser
treatment, or  cryosurgery. If the cancer
has spread into the cervical canal, a cone
biopsy may be sufficient to remove all
the diseased tissue. In more advanced
cases affecting the pelvic organs, radio-
therapy may be given. Radical surgery,
in which the bladder, vagina, cervix,
uterus, and rectum are removed, may
be recommended in certain cases.
cervix, disorders of The cervix is sus-
ceptible to injuries, infections, tumours,
and other conditions. Minor injury to
the cervix may occur during childbirth,
particularly if labour is prolonged. Per-
sistent damage to muscle fibres as a
result of injury may lead to  cervical
incompetence. Cervical erosion is a con-
dition in which mucus-secreting cells
form on the outside of the cervix. 
The most common cervical infections
are sexually transmitted, such as  gon-
orrhoea,  chlamydial infections, and
trichomoniasis. Viral infections of the
cervix include those due to the human
papilloma virus and the herpes simplex
virus (see warts, genital; herpes, genital).
Polyps are noncancerous growths on the
cervix. Cancerous growths (see  cervix,
cancer of) are preceded by changes in the
surface cells (cervical dysplasias), which
can be detected by a cervical smear test.
cestodes The scientific name for tape-
worms (see tapeworm infestation).
cetirizine An antihistamine drug used to
relieve the symptoms of conditions such
as allergic rhinitis (hay fever) and urticaria.
cetrimide An antiseptic used in prepara-
tions for cleansing the skin.
Chagas＊ disease An infectious parasitic
disease found only in parts of South
and Central America that is spread by
CERVIX CHAGAS＊ DISEASE
C
Ovary
Uterus
Fallopian
tube
Cervix
CERVIX
Vagina
Bladdercheilitis Inflammation, cracking, and dry-
ness of  the lips that may be caused by
ill-fitting dentures, a local infection, aller-
gyto cosmetics, excessive sunbathing,
or deficiency of riboflavin (vitamin B3). 
chelating agents Chemicals used in
the treatment of metal poisoning that
act by combining with metals such as
lead, arsenic, and mercury to form less
poisonous substances.  Penicillamine is
a commonly used chelating agent.
chemist Another term for a pharmacist.
chemotherapy The term that usually
describes the use of drugs to treat can-
cer but which may also describe the use
of antibiotics to treat infectious diseases.
Chemotherapy works by destroying bac-
teria or cancer cells or by preventing
them from multiplying. Cancer chemo-
therapy drugs may also have effects on
normal tissue such as bone marrow,
the intestinal lining, the hair follicles, the
ovaries and testes, and the mouth,
sometimes causing severe side effects. 
chenodeoxycholic acid A chemical in
bile that reduces the amount of choles-
terol released by the  liver into the bile.
It is sometimes used to treat small gall-
stones, if they contain mainly cholesterol
and no calcium. Side effects include
diarrhoea and, rarely, liver damage. 
chest The upper part of the trunk.
Known technically as the  thorax, the
chest extends from the base of the neck
down to the diaphragm. 
chest compression Also called cardiac
compression massage (see  cardiopul-
monary resuscitation).
chest pain Pain in the chest, which is
often without serious cause, but which
may be a symptom of an underlying dis-
order requiring urgent treatment. The
pain may be in the chest wall or in an
organ within the chest. The most com-
mon causes of pain in the chest wall are
a strained muscle or an injury, such as
a broken rib. A sharp pain that travels
to the front of the chest may be due to
pressure on a nerve root attached to the
spinal cord as a result of, for example,
osteoarthritis of the  vertebrae. Pain in
the side of the chest may be due to
pleurodynia. The viral infection  herpes
zoster (shingles) may cause severe pain
along the course of a nerve in the chest
121
insects commonly called cone-nosed or
assassin bugs. The parasites live in the
bloodstream and can affect the heart,
intestines, and nervous system. Symp-
toms include swelling of the lymph nodes
and fever. Long-term complications in-
clude damage to the heart. The drug
nifurtimox kills the parasites in the
blood but has unpleasant side effects.
chalazion A round, painless swelling in
the upper or lower eyelid caused by
obstruction of one of the meibomian
glands that lubricate the edge of the
eyelids. Chalazions are sometimes called
meibomian cysts. They are particularly
common in people suffering from acne,
rosacea, or seborrhoeic dermatitis. If the
cyst becomes infected the eyelid becomes
more swollen, red, and painful. A large
swelling putting pressure on the cornea
at the front of the eye can cause blurring
of vision. About a 3rd of chalazions dis-
appear without treatment, but large
cysts may need to be removed surgically.
chancre, hard An ulcer, usually on the
genitals, that develops during the first
stage of syphilis. 
chancroid A sexually transmitted disease,
found mainly in the tropics, character-
ized by painful  ulcers on the genitals
and enlarged lymph nodes in the groin.
The disorder is caused by the bacterium
HAEMOPHILUS DUCREYI. Prompt treatment
with antibiotic drugs is usually effective. 
chapped skin Sore, cracked, rough skin,
usually on the hands, face, and particu-
larly the lips, due to dryness. Chapping
is caused by the lack, or removal, of the
natural oils that keep skin supple. It tends
to occur in cold weather, when oil-secret-
ingglands produce less oil, or after
repeated washing or wetting. Treatment
is with a lanolin-based cream.
charcoal A form of carbon used in
medicine mainly as an adsorbent agent
in the emergency treatment of some
types of poisoning and drug overdose. 
Charcot每Marie每Tooth disease An in-
herited muscle-wasting disease of the
legs (see peroneal muscular atrophy).
Charcot＊s joint A joint that is repeated-
lydamaged by injuries that have gone
unnoticed because of loss of sensation
in the joint (see neuropathic joint).
check-up See examination, physical.
CHEST PAIN CHALAZION
C122
wall. In Tietze＊s syndrome, inflammation
at the junctions of the rib cartilages caus-
espain on the front of the chest wall.
Pain within the chest may be caused by
pleurisy, as a result of bronchitis, pneu-
monia, or, rarely,  pulmonary embolism.
Cancerous tumours of the lung (see lung
cancer; mesothelioma) may cause pain
as they grow and press on the  pleura
and ribs. Acid reflux may lead to heart-
burn, a burning pain behind the sternum.
The common heart disorder  angina
pectoris causes pain in the centre of the
chest that may spread outwards to the
throat, jaw, or arms. Myocardial infarc-
tion (heart attack) and acute pericarditis
both also produce severe pain in the
centre of the chest. Mitral valve prolapse
may cause sharp chest pain, usually on
the left side. Chest pain may also be a
result of  anxiety and emotional stress
(see hyperventilation; panic attack). 
chest thrust A  first aid technique to
unblockthe  airway in cases of  choking.
when abdominal thrusts would be dan-
gerous (such asin infants) or impossible
(such asin pregnant women). In a chest
thrust, the first-aider places a fist in the
other hand, and, pressing against the
victim＊s lower breastbone, thrusts the
chest wall inwards
up to 5 times. The
pressure simulates
the coughing reflex
and may expel the
obstruction. 
chest X-ray One
of the most fre-
quently performed
medical tests, usu-
ally carried out to
examine the heart
or lungs to confirm
diagnoses of heart
disorders and lung
diseases. (See also
X-rays.) 
Cheyne每Stokes respiration An abnor-
malpattern of breathing in which the
rate and depth of respiration varies.
Cheyne每Stokes respiration is character-
ized by repeated cycles, lasting a few
minutes, of deep, rapid breathing that
becomes slower and shallower and then
stops for 10每20 seconds. The pattern
may be due to malfunction of the part
of the brain that controls breathing (as
occurs in some cases of stroke and head
injury). It may also occur as a resultof
heart failure or in healthy people at high
altitudes, especially during sleep.
chickenpox A common, mild infectious
disease (also called varicella) occurring
in childhood and characterized by a
rash and slight fever. In adults, chicken-
pox is rare but usually more severe. An
attack gives lifelong immunity, but the
virus remains dormant in nerves and
may reappear later in life to cause her-
pes zoster  (shingles). The cause of
chickenpox is the varicella-zoster virus,
which is spread in airborne droplets. A
widespread rash develops 2每3 weeks
after infection, consisting of clusters of
small, red, itchy spots that become
fluid-filled blisters within a few hours.
After several days the blisters dry out to
form scabs. Scratching the blisters can
lead to secondary infection and scar-
ring. Paracetamol helps reduce fever and
calamine lotion may be used to relieve
itching. In severe cases,  aciclovir (an
antiviral drug) may be prescribed. 
chigoe A painful, itchy, pea-sized swelling
caused by a sand flea that lives in sandy
soil in Africa and tropical America. The
flea penetrates the skin of the feet and
lays eggs. Chigoe fleas should be re-
moved with a sterile needle, and the
wounds treated with an antiseptic.
chilblain An itchy, purple-red swelling,
usually on a toe or finger, caused by
excessive constriction of small blood
vessels below the surface of the skin in
cold weather. Chilblains are most com-
mon in the young and the elderly, and
women are more susceptible to them.
They generally heal without treatment
child abuse The maltreatment of chil-
dren. Child abuse may take the form of
physical injury, sexual abuse, emotional
mistreatment, and/or neglect; it occurs
at all levels of society. Being deprived or
ill-treated in childhood may predispose
people to repeat the pattern of abuse
with their own children. Children who are
abused or at risk of abuse may be placed
in care while the health and social ser-
vices decide on the best course of action.
childbed fever See puerperal fever.
CHEST THRUST CHILDBED FEVER
C
CHESTX-RAY
HeartRib Spine
Lung Diaphragm123
childbirth The process by which an
infant leaves the uterus and enters the
outside world. Childbirth (labour) normal-
lytakes place between 38 and 42 weeks
of pregnancy and occurs in 3 stages. 
The onset of the 1st stage of labour is
marked by regular contractions which
become progressively more painful, and
occur at shorter intervals. The cervix be-
comes thinned and softened and then
begins to dilate with each contraction.
During this time, there may be a ※show＊＊,
the mucous plug that blocks the cervi-
cal canal during pregnancy is expelled
as a bloody discharge. ※Breaking of the
waters＊＊, the rupture of the amniotic sac,
may occur as a slow trickle of fluid or a
sudden gush.  The cervix is fully dilated
when the opening has widened to about
10cm in diameter. This may take 12
hours or more for a first baby, but only a
few hours for subsequent babies.
In the 2nd stage of labour, the woman
feels the urge to push with each strong
contraction. As the baby＊s head descends
into the  vagina, it rotates to face the
mother＊s back. The perineum is stretched
thin at this stage, and an  episiotomy
may be performed to prevent it from
tearing. Once the baby＊s head is deliv-
ered, the rest of the body follows with
the next contractions. After delivery, the
umbilical cord is clamped and cut.
In the 3rd stage of labour, the delivery
of the placenta takes place. 
The various forms of pain relief avail-
able during normal labour and delivery
include opioid analgesic drugs, epidural
anaesthesia, and pudendal block.
childbirth, complications of Difficul-
ties and problems occurring after the
onset of  labour. Some complications are
potentially life-threatening, especially if
they impair the baby＊s oxygen supply
(see  fetal distress). Premature labour
may occur, with the delivery of a small,
immature baby (see  prematurity). Pre-
mature rupture of the  amniotic sac can
lead to infection in the uterus, requiring
prompt delivery of the baby and treat-
ment with antibiotic drugs.
Slow progress in the 1st stage of a
normal labour due to inadequate con-
tractions of the uterus is usually treated
with intravenous infusions of synthetic
oxytocin. If the mother cannot push
strongly enough, or contractions are in-
effective in the 2nd stage of labour, the
baby may be delivered by forceps deliv-
ery,  vacuum extraction, or  caesarean
section. Rarely, a woman has  eclampsia
during labour, requiring treatment with
anticonvulsant drugs and oxygen, and
induction of labour or caesarean section.
Bleeding before labour (antepartum
haemorrhage) or during labour may be
due to premature separation of the pla-
centa from the wall of the uterus or, less
commonly, to a condition called placenta
praevia, in which the placenta lies over
the opening of the  cervix. Blood loss
after the delivery (postpartum haemor-
rhage) is usually due to failure of the
uterus to contract after delivery, or to
C
Vagina (birth
canal)
Dilated 
cervix
Baby＊s
head
EMERGENCE OF HEAD CERVIX DILATED
Widened vagina Placenta Bladder
Baby＊s
head
Mother＊s spine Rectum
CHILDBIRTH
CHILDBIRTH, COMPLICATIONS OF CHILDBIRTH
Contracting uterus124
retention of part of the placenta. If the
baby lies in the breech position (see
breech delivery), caesarean section may
be necessary. Multiple pregnancies (see
pregnancy, multiple) carry an increased
risk of premature labour and of prob-
lems during delivery. If the mother＊s
pelvis is too small in proportion to the
head of her baby, delivery by caesarean
section is necessary.
childbirth, natural The use of relaxation
and other techniques to help cope with
pain and minimize the use of drugs and
medical intervention during childbirth. 
child development The acquisition of
physical, mental, and social skills in chil-
dren. Although there is wide variationin
individual rates of progress, most children
develop certain skills within predictable
age ranges. For example, most infants
start to walk at 12每18 months. Capability
for new skills is linked to the maturity of
the child＊s nervous system. Individual rates
of maturity are  determined genetically
and  modified by environmental factors
in the uterus and after birth. Develop-
ment is assessed in early childhood by
looking at abilities in 4 main areas: loco-
motion; hearing and speech; vision and
fine movement; and social behaviour
and play. (See also developmental delay.)
child guidance A multidisciplinary diag-
nosis and advice team service for children
suffering from emotional or behavioural
problems in children. Indications of prob-
lems include poor performance at school,
disruptive or withdrawn behaviour, law-
breaking, and drug abuse. 
Child guidance professionals include
psychiatrists, psychologists, and psychi-
atric social workers. For young children,
play therapy may be used for diagnosis.
Older children may be offered  coun-
selling, psychotherapy, or group therapy.
Family therapy may be used in cases
where there are difficulties between the
child and 1 or both parents.
chill A shivering attack accompanied by
chattering teeth, pale skin, goose pim-
ples, and feeling cold. Chill frequently
precedes a fever. Repeated or severe
shivering suggests serious illness. 
Chinese medicine Traditional Chinese
medicine is generally based on the the-
ory that a universal life-force, called chi,
manifests itself in the body as 2 com-
plementary qualities that are known as
yin and yang. According to this belief,
vigorous yang and restraining yin must be
in balance, and the chi must flow evenly
for good health. Treatments for illness
aim to restore the yin-yang balance and
normalize the flow of chi using tech-
niques such as Chinese herbal medicine,
acupressure, acupuncture, and t＊ai chi.
chiropody The examination, diagnosis,
treatment, and prevention of diseases
and malfunctions of the foot and its
related structures. 
chiropractic A complementary treatment
for a range of disorders, including back
pain, based on manipulation of the spine. 
chlamydial infections Infectious dis-
eases caused by chlamydiae, a group
of microorganisms. Two main species of
chlamydiae cause disease in humans.
The first, CHLAMYDIA TRACHOMATIS, has a
number of strains. In men, it is a major
cause of nongonococcal urethritis, which
may cause a discharge from the penis.
In women, the infection is usually symp-
tomless, but it can lead to salpingitis. A
baby born to a woman with chlamydial
infection may acquire an acute eye con-
dition called neonatal  ophthalmia. In
parts of Africa and Asia, certain strains
of  CHLAMYDIA TRACHOMATIS cause  tra-
choma, a serious eye disease. 
CHILDBIRTH, NATURALCHLAMYDIAL INFECTIONS
C
Precise hand
movements
realign the
vertebrae
Adjustable
bed
Chiropractor
CHIROPRACTIC125
A second species of chlamydiae, CHLAMY-
DIA PSITTACI, mainly affects birds but can
occasionally spread to people who have
contact with pigeons, parrots, parakeets,
or poultry, causing a type of pneumonia
called psittacosis.
Treatment for chlamydial infections is
with antibiotic drugs.
chloasma A condition, also called melas-
ma,in which blotches of pale brown
pigmentation appear on the forehead,
cheeks, and nose. The pigmentation is
aggravated by sunlight. Chloasma some-
times develops during pregnancy. More
rarely, it is associated with the meno-
pause or use of oral contraceptives.The
condition usually fades but may recur. 
chlorambucil An  anticancer drug used
to treat some types of cancer, for exam-
ple Hodgkin＊s disease.
chloramphenicol An  antibiotic com-
monly used in the form of drops to treat
superficial eye infections. It is also used
to treat life-threatening infections when
thecausative organism is unknown.
Rarely, tablets or injections are associ-
ated with aplastic anaemia.
chlorate poisoning The toxic effects
of chemicals present in some defoliant
weedkillers. Ingesting chlorates can cause
kidney and liver damage, corrosionof
the intestine, and methaemoglobinae-
mia (a chemical change in haemoglobin
in the blood). Small doses of chlorates
can prove fatal. Symptoms of poisoning
include ulceration in the mouth, abdo-
minal pain, and diarrhoea. 
chlordiazepoxide A benzodiazepine drug
mainly used to treat anxiety.
chlorhexidine A type of disinfectant
mainly used to cleanse the skin before
surgery or before taking a blood sample. 
chlorine A poisonous, yellowish-green
gas with powerful bleaching and disin-
fecting properties. Inhaling even small
amounts is highly irritating to the
lungs; large amounts are rapidly fatal. 
chloroform A colourless liquid produc-
ing a vapour that was formerly used as a
general anaesthetic (see  anaesthesia,
general). Chloroform is associated with
liver damage and heart problems, and
safer drugs are now used instead. 
chloroquine A drug used mainly in the
prevention and treatment of malaria. It is
also used as an  antirheumatic to treat
rheumatoid arthritis and lupus erythema-
tosus. Side effects are nausea, headache,
diarrhoea, rashes, and abdominal pain.
Long-term use may damage the retina.
chlorphenamine An  antihistamine drug
used to treat allergies such as allergic
rhinitis (hay fever), allergic conjunctivitis,
urticaria, and  angioedema. It is also
found in some cold remedies.
chlorpheniramine An alternative name
for chlorphenamine.
chlorpromazine A widely prescribed
antipsychotic drug used to relieve symp-
toms of major psychotic illnesses such
as  schizophrenia and  mania. The drug
reduces delusional and hallucinatory
experiences and may have an effect on
irritability and overactivity. It is also
used as an antiemetic. Chlorpromazine
may cause photosensitivity of the skin
and, in some cases, parkinsonism, slow
reactions, and blurred vision. 
chlorpropamide A drug that is used to
treat  diabetes mellitus (see  hypogly-
caemics, oral). 
choanal atresia A  congenital defect of
the nose in which 1 or both of the nasal
cavities are not fully developed.
choking Partial or complete inability to
breathe due to an obstruction of the
airways. Choking is often due to food or
drink entering the  trachea and bronchi
instead of passing from the pharynx into
the oesophagus. Coughing normally dis-
lodges the food or drink. An obstruction
that partially blocks the airway and cannot
be dislodged by coughing is more seri-
ous. If the airway is completely blocked,
total suffocation will result if the block-
age is not removed. If an obstruction
cannot be cleared by first aid techniques,
such as the  Heimlich manoeuvre or
removed manually, an emergency  tra-
cheostomy may be performed to restore
the airway before removal of the
obstruction with instruments.
cholangiocarcinoma A cancerous
growth in one of the  bile ducts, which
causes jaundice and weight loss.
cholangiography A procedure that uses
a  contrast medium to make  bile  ducts
visible on X-rays. Cholangiography is used
to look for biliary stones or to diagnose
narrowing or tumours of the bile ducts.
CHOLANGIOGRAPHY CHLOASMA
Ccholangitis Inflammation of the com-
monbile duct (see biliary system). There
are 2 types: acute ascending cholangitis
and sclerosing cholangitis. Acute
ascending cholangitis is usually due to
bacterial infection of the duct and its
bile, generally as a result of blockage of
the duct by, for example, a gallstone
(see bile duct obstruction). The infection
spreads up the duct and may affect the
liver. The main symptoms are recurrent
bouts of jaundice, abdominal pain,
chills, and fever. Mild attacks are treated
with antibiotics and a high intake of flu-
ids. In severe, life-threatening attacks,
which may be accompanied by  septi-
caemia and  kidney failure, the infected
material may be drained from the bile
duct by surgery or endoscopy.
Sclerosing cholangitis is a rare condi-
tion in which all the bile ducts within
and outside the liver become narrowed.
The condition causes cholestasis, chron-
ic jaundice, and itching of the skin. The
liver is progressively damaged. Colestyra-
mine may relieve itching. The only other
treatment available is a liver transplant.
chole- A prefix that means relating to
the bile or the biliary system.
cholecalciferol An alternative name
for colecalciferol, also known as vitamin
D3 (see vitamin D).
cholecystectomy Surgery to remove the
gallbladder, usually to deal with  gall-
stones. Cholecystectomy is also used in
acute cholecystitis and as an emergency
treatment for perforation of the gall-
bladder or  empyema. The procedure is
carried out using conventional surgery
or, more commonly, by minimally inva-
sive surgery using a laparoscope.
cholecystitis Acute or chronic inflam-
mation of the gallbladder, causing severe
abdominal pain. Acute cholecystitis is
usually caused by a gallstone obstruct-
ing the outlet from the gallbladder. The
trapped bile causes irritation of the
gallbladder walls and may become in-
fected by bacteria. The main symptom
is severe constant pain in the right side
of the abdomen under the ribs, accom-
panied by fever and, occasionally,
jaundice. Treatment is usually with anal-
gesic drugs,  antibiotic drugs, and an
intravenous infusion of nutrients and
126
fluids. In some cases, complications
develop, which may include  peritonitis,
if the gallbladder bursts, and empyema.
Both require urgent surgical treatment.
Repeated mild attacks of acute chole-
cystitis can lead to a chronic form, in
which the gallbladder shrinks, its walls
thicken, and it ceases to store bile.
Symptoms (indigestion, pains in the
upper abdomen, nausea, and belching)
may be aggravated by eating fatty food.
Cholecystectomy is the usual treatment.
cholecystography An X-ray procedure
that uses a contrast medium to examine
the  gallbladder and common  bile duct,
usually to detect  gallstones. Cholecys-
tography has largely been replaced by
ultrasound scanning of the gallbladder. 
cholecystokinin A gastrointestinal hor-
mone produced in the  duodenum in
response to the ingestion of fats and
other food substances. It stimulates the
release of bile from the gallbladder and
digestive enzymes from the  pancreas,
thus facilitating the digestive process.
cholera An infection of the small intes-
tine by the bacterium  VIBRIO CHOLERAE
causing profuse watery diarrhoea, which
can lead to dehydration and death.
Infection is acquired by ingesting con-
taminated food or water. Outbreaks of
cholera occur regularly in northeast India,
but worldwide the disease is controlled
by sanitation. Treatment is with water
containing salts and sugar (see  oral
rehydration therapy) and, in severe cases,
intravenous infusion.  Antibiotic drugs
can shorten the period of diarrhoea and
infectiousness. With adequate rehydra-
tion, affected people usually make a full
recovery from the infection.
cholestasis Stagnation of  bile in the
small bile ducts within the liver, leading
to  jaundice and liver disease. The
obstruction to the flow of bile may be
intrahepatic (within the liver) or extra-
hepatic (in the bile ducts outside the
liver). Intrahepatic cholestasis may occur
as a result of viral hepatitis (see hepati-
tis, viral) or as a side effect of a number
of drugs. The flow of bile improves grad-
ually as the inflammation from the
hepatitis resolves or the drug is discon-
tinued. The bile ducts outside the liver
can become obstructed by, for example,
CHOLANGITIS CHOLESTASIS
C127
gallstones or tumours (see  bile duct
obstruction); rarely, the ducts are absent
from birth (see biliary atresia). Bile duct
obstruction and biliary atresia are often
treated surgically.
cholesteatoma A rare but serious con-
dition in which skin cells proliferate and
grow inwards from the ear canal into the
middle ear. Cholesteatoma usually occurs
as a result of long-standing otitis media
together with a defect in the eardrum
(see eardrum, perforated). Left untreated,
it may damage the small bones in the
middle ear and other structures. Choles-
teatoma needs to be removed surgically
through the eardrum or by mastoidectomy.
cholesterol A fat-like substance that is
an important constituent of body cells
and is also involved in the formation of
hormones and bile salts. Cholesterol in
the blood is made by the liver from
foods, especially saturated fats, although
a small amount is absorbed directly
from cholesterol-rich foods such as eggs.
High blood cholesterol levels increase
the risk of atherosclerosis, and with it the
risk of coronary artery disease or stroke.
In general, cholesterol transported in the
blood in the form of low-density lipo-
proteins (LDLs) or very low-density
lipoproteins (VLDLs) is a risk factor for
these conditions, while cholesterol in
the form of high-density lipoproteins
(HDLs) seems to protect against arterial
disease. Blood cholesterol levels are in-
fluenced by diet, heredity, and metabolic
diseases such as  diabetes mellitus, and
can be measured by blood tests. Levels
below 5.2 mmol/L are acceptable; higher
levels may require further tests. Dietary
changes can lower cholesterol slightly;
drugs such as  simvastatin achieve a
greater reduction.
cholestyramine An alternative spelling
for colestyramine.
chondritis Inflammation of a cartilage,
usually caused by pressure, stress, or
injury. Costochondritis is inflammation
affecting the cartilage between the ribs
and the sternum (breastbone). 
chondro- A prefix denoting a relation-
ship to  cartilage, as in chondrocyte, a
cell that produces cartilage.
chondroma A noncancerous tumour
composed of cartilage, affecting the bones.
Chondromas most often occur in the
hands and feet (see chondromatosis).
chondromalacia patellae A painful
disorder of the knee in which the carti-
lage behind the patella (kneecap) is
damaged. Adolescents are most com-
monly affected. The condition may result
from knee injuries or sporting activities
in which the knee is bent for long per-
iods. This action weakens the inner part
of the quadriceps muscle (at the front of
the thigh) causing the patella to tilt
when the knee is straightened and rub
against the lower end of the femur. The
cartilage that covers both bones becomes
roughened, causing pain and tender-
ness. Treatment is with analgesic drugs
and exercises to strengthen the thigh
muscles. Rarely, surgery may be needed.
chondromatosis A condition in which
multiple noncancerous tumours, called
chondromas, arise in the bones, most
commonly the bones of the hands and
feet. The tumours consist of  cartilage
cells and usually cause no symptoms. 
chondrosarcoma A cancerous growth
of  cartilage occurring within or on the
surface of large bones, causing pain and
swelling. Usually occurring in middle age,
the tumour develops slowly from a non-
cancerous tumour (see  chondroma;
dyschondroplasia) or from normal bone.
Amputation of the bone above the tumour
usually results in a permanent cure.
chordee Abnormal curvature of the penis,
usually downwards. Chordee mainly
occurs in males with  hypospadias, a
birth defect in which the urethral open-
ing lies on the underside of the penis.
Corrective surgery is usually performed
between the ages of 1 and 3 years.
chorea A condition characterized by
irregular, rapid, jerky movements, usu-
ally affecting the face, limbs, and trunk.
It is a feature of  Huntington＊s disease
and Sydenham＊s chorea, and may occur
in pregnancy. Chorea may also be a side
effect of certain drugs, including  oral
contraceptives; certain drugs for psychi-
atric disorders; and drugs for treating
Parkinson＊s disease. Symptoms usually
disappear when the drug is withdrawn.
Underlying causes of chorea are treated
with drugs that inhibit nerve pathways
concerned with movement.
CHOREA CHOLESTEATOMA
Ctoxocariasis or toxoplasmosis, more rarely
by sarcoidosis, syphilis, and histoplasmo-
sis. It sometimes has no obvious cause.
Treatment includes  corticosteroid drugs
for the inflammation, and  antibiotic
drugs for any causative infection.
choroid plexus A network of thin-
walled blood vessels in the eye or brain.
The choroid plexus of the eye supplies
blood to the  retina. In the brain, the
choroid plexus lines the  ventricles and
produces cerebrospinal fluid.
Christmas disease A rare genetic
bleeding disorder in which there is defi-
cient production of one of the proteins
in blood needed for blood coagulation
(see  blood clotting). Christmas disease
has similar features to haemophilia.
chromium A metallic element that has
a vital role in the activities of several
enzymes in the body. Chromium is
required only in minute amounts (see
trace elements). In excess, chromium is
toxic and produces inflammation of the
skin and, if inhaled, damages the nose
and may increase the risk of lung cancer.
chromosomal abnormalities Variations
from normal in the number or structure
of chromosomes contained in a person＊s
cells. The cause is generally a fault in the
process of chromosome division, either
during the formation of an egg or sperm,
or during the first few divisions of a fer-
tilized egg. Chromosomal abnormalities
are classified according to whether they
involve the44 autosomes or the 2 X and Y
sex chromosomes.A  complete extra set
of chromosomes per cell is called poly-
ploidy and is lethal.
Autosomal abnormalities cause physi-
cal and mental defects of varying
severity. Some types of autosomal
abnormality, known as trisomy, consist
of an extra chromosome on 1 of the 22
pairs of autosomes. The most common
trisomy is  Down＊s syndrome. Some-
times, part of a chromosome is missing,
as in cri du chat syndrome. In transloca-
tion, a part of a chromosome is joined
to another, causing no ill effects in the
person but a risk of abnormality in his or
her children. 
Sex chromosome abnormalities include
Turner＊s syndrome, in which a girl is
born with a single X chromosome in her
choreoathetosis A condition in which
the jerky, uncontrolled movements char-
acteristicof  chorea are combined with
the slower, continuous writhing move-
ments of  athetosis. Choreoathetosis
occursin children with  cerebral palsy
and as a side effect of certain drugs.
choriocarcinoma A rare cancerous tu-
mour that develops from placental tissue
in the uterus, usually as a complication
of a hydatidiform mole (a noncancerous
tumour) but sometimes after a normal
pregnancy or a miscarriage.  Untreated,
it destroys the walls of the uterus and
may spread to the vagina and vulva and,
eventually, to the liver, lungs, brain, and
bones. Successful treatment relies on
early diagnosis. 
If a woman has a hydatidiform mole,
she is screened regularly after treatment
using  ultrasound scanning  and tests to
measure blood and urine levels of the
hormone human chorionic gona-
dotrophin (HCG). High levels of HCG
are associated with choreocarcinoma.
Treatment is with anticancer drugs. 
chorion One of the 2 membranes that
surround the  embryo. The chorion lies
outside the  amnion, has small finger-
like projections called the chorionic
villi, and develops into the placenta. 
chorionic villus sampling Amethod
of diagnosing genetic abnormalities in
a  fetus using a small sample of tissue
taken from the chorionic villi at edge of
the placenta. Because the cells have the
same chromosome makeup as those in
the fetus, they can be used to detect
genetic abnormalities. Chorionic villus
sampling (CVS) is usually performed in
the first 3 months of pregnancy in
women who are at a higher-than-normal
risk of having a child with a chromoso-
mal disorder, such as Down＊s syndrome,
or a genetic disease, such as thalassaemia.
Chromosome analysis of the villi cells
takes place in the laboratory. CVS
slightly increases the risk of miscarriage.
choroid A layer of tissue at the back of
the eye, behind the  retina. The choroid
contains many blood vessels that supply
nutrients and oxygen to the retinal cells
and to surrounding tissues in the eye. 
choroiditis Inflammation of the choroid.
It is often caused by infections such as
128
CHOREOATHETOSISCHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES
Ccells  instead of 2, causing physical
abnormalities, defective sexual develop-
ment, and infertility. A boy with 1 or more
extraX  chromosomes has  Klinefelter＊s
syndrome, which causes defective sexual
development and infertility.  The pres-
ence of an extra X chromosome in women
or an extra Y chromosome in men nor-
mally has no physical effect but increases
the risk of mild mental handicap.
Chromosomal abnormalities are diag-
nosed by  chromosome analysis in early
pregnancy, using amniocentesis or chori-
onic villussampling.
chromosome analysis Study of the
chromosomes in body cells to discover
whether a  chromosomal abnormality is
present or to establish its nature. Fetal
cells for analysis can be obtained in the
uterus by amniocentesis or chorionic vil-
lus sampling. If a serious abnormality
such as Down＊s syndrome is identified,
termination of the pregnancy and gen-
etic counselling is offered.Chromosome
analysis is also carried out when a baby
is stillborn without an obvious cause,
or is born with abnormal physical char-
acteristics that suggest a chromosomal
defect, such as Turner＊s sydrome.
Chromosome analysis in children and
adults uses white blood cells taken from
a blood sample. Analysis of the sex
chromosomes may be carried out to
establish the chromosomal sex of a child
in cases where the genitals have an
ambiguous appearance (see  genitalia,
ambiguous); to confirm or exclude the
diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities;
or to investigate infertility.
chromosomes Thread-like structures in
the nuclei of cells. Chromosomes carry
inherited information in the form of
genes, which govern all cell activity and
function. Each chromosome contains
up to several thousand genes arranged
in single file along a long double fila-
ment of DNA. The sequence of chemical
units, or bases, in the DNAprovides the
coded instructions for cellular activities. 
All an individual＊s body cells (with the
exception of egg or sperm cells) carry
precisely the same chromosomal mate-
rial copied by a process of  cell division
from the original material in the fertil-
ized egg. Each human cell normally
129
contains 46 chromosomes made up of
23 pairs. Half of each pair is of maternal
and half of paternal origin. 22 pairs are
autosomal chromosomes, which are the
same in both sexes; the remaining pair
is made up of 2 sex chromosomes. In
females, the sex chromosomes are a
pair of X chromosomes. In males, 1 is
an X chromosome and the other is a Y
chromosome. One sex chromosome (an
X) originates from the mother＊s egg and
the other (an X in girls; a Y in boys)
from the father＊s sperm.
chronic A term describing a disorder or
set of symptoms that has persisted for a
long time. A chronic illness implies a
continuing disease process with little
change in symptoms from day to day.
(See also acute.)
chronic fatigue syndrome A condition
causing extreme fatigue over a prolonged
period, often over years. It is most com-
mon in women aged between 25 and 45. 
The cause of the condition is unclear.
In some cases, it develops after recovery
from a viral infection or after an emo-
tional life event such as bereavement.
In other cases, there is no such preced-
ing illness or event. The main symptom
is persistent tiredness. Other symptoms
of the syndrome vary, but commonly
include impairment of short-term mem-
ory or concentration, sore throat, tender
lymph nodes, muscleand joint pain,
CHRONIC FATIGUE SYNDROME CHROMOSOME ANALYSIS
C
CHROMOSOMES
SET OF HUMAN CHROMOSOMES
Chromosome pair130
muscle fatigue, unrefreshing sleep, and
headaches. The syndrome is often asso-
ciated with depression or anxiety. 
There is no specific diagnostic test for
chronic fatigue syndrome, and investi-
gations are usually aimed at excluding
other possible causes of the symptoms,
such as anaemia. A physical examination,
blood tests, and psychological assess-
ment may be carried out. If no cause can
be found, diagnosis of chronic fatigue
syndrome is made from the symptoms.
Analgesic drugs or  antidepressant drugs
may relieve the symptoms. Physiotherapy
or  psychotherapy may also be helpful.
Chronic fatigue syndrome is a long-
term disorder, but the symptoms clear
up after several years in some people. 
chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease See  pulmonary disease, chronic
obstructive.
ciclosporin An immunosuppressant drug
used following  transplant surgery. The
drug reduces the risk of tissue rejection
and the need for large doses of cortico-
steroid drugs. Ciclosporin may need to
be taken indefinitely after a transplant. It
is also used to treat rheumatoid arthritis
and other autoimmune disorders. Because
ciclosporin suppresses the  immunesys-
tem, it increases the susceptibility to
infection. Swelling of the gums and in-
creased hair growth are fairly common.
Ciclosporin may also cause kidney dam-
age, and regular monitoring of kidney
function is required.
cilia Hair-like filaments on the surface
of some epithelial cells (see epithelium).
Cilia are found particularly in the linings
of the respiratory tract, where they pro-
pel dust and mucus out of the airways.
ciliary body A structure in the eye con-
taining muscles that alter the shape of
the  lens to adjust focus. (See also
accommodation.)
cimetidine An H2-receptor antagonist
used as an  ulcer-healing drug. Cimeti-
dine promotes the healing of gastric
and duodenal ulcers (see  peptic ulcer)
and reduces the symptoms of  oeso-
phagitis. Side effects include dizziness,
fatigue, and rashes. More rarely, the drug
causes impotence and gynaecomastia. 
CIN The abbreviation for  cervical intra-
epithelial neoplasia. 
cinnarizine An antihistamine drug used
to control nausea and vomiting due to
travel sickness or to reduce nausea and
vertigo in inner-ear disorders, such as
labyrinthitis and M谷ni豕re＊s disease. High
doses are sometimes used to improve
circulation in peripheral vascular disease
and Raynaud＊s disease. Side effects may
include drowsiness, lethargy, dry mouth,
and blurred vision.
ciprofloxacin An antibacterialdrug used
mainly to treat infections of the respira-
tory, gastrointestinal, and urinary tracts.
circadian rhythms Any biological pat-
tern based on a cycle approximately 24
hours long, also called a diurnal rhythm.
(See also biorhythms.)
circulation, disorders of Conditions af-
fecting blood flow around the body (see
arteries, disorders of; veins, disorders of).
circulatory system The heart and blood
vessels, which together maintain a con-
tinuous flow of blood throughout the
body. The system provides tissues with
oxygen and nutrients, and carries away
waste products. The circulatory system
consists of 2 main parts: the systemic
circulation, which supplies blood to the
whole body apart from the lungs; and the
pulmonary circulation to the lungs.
Within the systemic circulation, there is
a bypass(the portal circulation), which
carries nutrient-rich blood from the stom-
ach, intestine, and other digestive
organs to the liver for processing, stor-
age, or re-entry into general circulation.
In the systemic circulation, oxygen-rich
blood from the pulmonary circulation is
pumped under high pressure from the
left ventricle of the heart  into the aorta,
from where it travels through arteries
and smaller arterioles to all parts of the
body. Within body tissues, the arterioles
branch into networks of fine blood ves-
sels called capillaries. Oxygen and other
nutrients pass from the blood through
the capillaries＊ thin walls into body tis-
sues;  carbon dioxide and other wastes
pass in the  opposite direction. Deoxy-
genated blood is returned to the heart
via venules, veins, and the venae cavae.
Venous blood returns to the right atri-
um of the heart to enter the pulmonary
circulation. It is pumped from the right
ventricle through the pulmonary artery
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARYCIRCULATORY SYSTEM
C131
to the lungs, where carbon dioxide is
exchanged for oxygen. The reoxygenated
blood then returns through the pul-
monary veins to the heart and re-enters
the systemic circulation.
circumcision Surgical removal of the
foreskin of the penis, usually performed
in newborn babies for religious reasons
or for reasons of hygiene. Circumcision
may be needed to treat phimosis, recur-
rent attacks of balanitis, or paraphimosis.
circumcision, female Removal of all or
parts of the  clitoris, labia majora, and
labia minora (see labia), sometimes com-
bined with narrowing of the entrance to
the vagina. Female circumcision is com-
mon in parts of Africa but has no valid
medical purpose. It can cause retention
of urine and injuries during sexual
intercourse and childbirth.
cirrhosis A condition of the liver arising
from long-term damage to its cells. In
cirrhosis, bands of fibrosis (internal
scarring) develop, leaving  nodules of
regenerating cells that are inadequately
supplied with blood. Liver function is
gradually impaired; the liver no longer
effectively removes toxic substances
from the blood (see  liver failure). The
distortion and fibrosis also lead to por-
tal hypertension. The most common
cause of cirrhosis is heavy alcohol con-
sumption. Other causes include forms
of hepatitis and, more rarely, disorders of
the bile ducts, haemochromatosis, Wilson＊s
disease, cystic fibrosis, and heart failure.
Cirrhosis may go unrecognized until
symptoms such as mild  jaundice, oede-
ma, and vomiting of blood develop.
There may be enlargement of the liver
and spleen and, in men, enlargement of
the breasts and loss of body hair due to
an imbalance in sex hormones caused
by liver failure. Complications of cirrho-
sis include ascites, oesophageal varices,
and hepatoma. Treatment is focused on
slowing the rate at which liver cells are
being damaged, if possible by treating
the cause. In some  cases, however, the
condition progressesand a  liver trans-
plant may be considered.
cisplatin An anticancer drug used to treat
some cancers of the testis and ovary. 
citalopram An antipressant drug.
CJD The abbreviation for  Creutzfeldt每
Jakob disease.
clap A slang term for gonorrhoea. 
clarithromycin An antibiotic drug used
to treat infections of the skin and respi-
ratory tract.
claudication A cramp-like pain in a
muscle, most often in the legs, due to
inadequate blood supply. Claudication
in the legs is usually caused by blockage
or narrowing of arteries du to  athero-
sclerosis (see peripheral vascular disease).
A rarer cause is spinal stenosis. In inter-
mittent claudication, pain is felt in the
calves after walking a certain distance
and is relieved by rest. 
CLAUDICATION CIRCUMCISION
C
Radial
artery
Great
saphenous vein
Femoral
vein
Inferior
vena cava
Aorta
Brachial
vein
Superior vena cava
CIRCULATORYSYSTEM
Iliac
artery
Femoral
artery
Jugular
vein
Temporal
artery
Heart
Common carotid
artery
Popliteal
artery
Posterior
tibial artery
Brachial artery132
claustrophobia Intense fear of being
in enclosed spaces, such as lifts, or of
being in crowded areas. Behaviour ther-
apy is the usual form of treatment. 
clavicle The collarbone. The 2 clavicles,
1 on each side, form joints with the top
of the sternum (breastbone) and the
scapula (shoulderblade). The clavicles
support the arms and transmit forces
from the arms to the central skeleton. 
claw-foot A deformity of the foot in
which the arch of the foot is exaggerated
and the tips of the toes turn under. Claw-
foot may be present from birth or result
from damage to the nerve or blood sup-
ply to the muscles of the foot. Surgery
may improve the condition.
claw-hand A deformity in which the
fingers are permanently curled, caused
by injury to the ulnar nerve. Treatment
includes repair of the damaged nerve, if
possible, by using splints to hold the
finger straight, or cutting a tendon in
the wrist to allow the fingers to straighten.
claw-toe A deformity of unknown cause
in which the end of one or more affected
toes bends downwards so that the toe
curls under. A painful corn may develop
on the tip of the toe or on the top of the
bent joint. Protective pads can  relieve
pressure from footwear. In severe cases,
surgery may be required.
cleft lip and palate A split in the
upper lip and/or palate that is present
at birth. Cleft lip is a vertical, usually
off-centre split in the upper lip that may
be a small notch or may extend to the
nose. The upper gum may also be cleft,
and the nose may be crooked. The term
hare lip refers only to a midline cleft lip,
which is rare. Cleft palate is a gap that
may extend from the back of the palate
to behind the teeth and be open to the
nasal cavity. Cleft palate is often accom-
panied by partial deafness and there
may be other birth defects. 
Surgery to repair a cleft lip may be
undertaken in the first few days after
birth or at about 3 months. It improves
appearance; after repair, speech defects
are rare. A cleft palate is usually re-
paired at about 12 months, but further
surgery,  orthodontic treatment, and
speech therapy may be required.
clemastine An antihistamine drug used to
relieve the symptoms of allergies such
as urticaria and allergic rhinitis (hay fever).
Clemastine can cause drowsiness.
clergyman＊s knee Inflammation of the
bursa that cushions the pressure point
over the tibial tubercle (the bony promi-
nence just below the knee) caused by
prolonged kneeling (see bursitis).
climacteric See menopause.
clindamycin An  antibiotic drug with
severe side effects, used only to treat
serious infections that do not respond
to other antibiotic drugs. 
clitoridectomy An operation to remove
the clitoris (see circumcision, female).
clitoris Part of the female genitalia 每 a
small, sensitive, erectile organ, located
just below the pubic bone and partly
enclosed within the folds of the  labia.
The clitoris swells and becomes more
sensitive during sexual stimulation.
clofibrate A  lipid-lowering drug that
reduces levels of  cholesterol and  trigly-
cerides in the blood and is a treatment
for some types of hyperlipidaemia. 
clomifene A drug used to treat female
infertility caused by failure to ovulate.
Minor side effects may include hot flush-
es, nausea, headache, breast tenderness,
and blurred vision. Occasionally, ovarian
cysts develop, but these shrink when
the dose is reduced. Use of the drug
may result in multiple births.
clomipramine A  tricyclic antidepressant
drug used as treatment for  depression.
Side effects include dry mouth, blurred
vision, and constipation. 
clonazepam A  benzodiazepine drug  that
is used mainly as an anticonvulsant drug
CLAUSTROPHOBIA CLONAZEPAM
C
CLAVICLE
Clavicle
Humerus
Scapula
Sternum
Vertebral column133
to prevent and treat epileptic fits (see
epilepsy). It also prevents petit mal attacks
in children. Side effects include drowsi-
ness, dizziness, fatigue, and irritability.
clone An exact copy. In medicine, the
term usually refers to copies of cells,
genes, or organisms. Clones of cells are
all descended from one original cell. In
many types of cancer, cells are thought
to be derived from one abnormal cell.
Clones of genes are duplicates of a sin-
gle gene. In research, several copies of a
gene can be made to enable the gene to
be studied in detail. Clones of organ-
isms are produced by removing the
nuclei from cells of a donor individual
and transplanting them into the egg
cells of another individual. When the
eggs mature into living plants or ani-
mals, they are all identical to the donor.
clonidine An antihypertensive drug used
to reduce high blood pressure. Possible
side effects include drowsiness, dizziness,
dry mouth, and constipation. Abrupt
withdrawal of high doses can cause a
dangerous rise in blood pressure.
clonus A rapid series of abnormal mus-
cle contractions that occur in response
to stretching. Clonus is a sign of dam-
age to nerve fibres that carry impulses
from the motor cortex in the  cerebrum
to a particular muscle. It is also a fea-
ture of seizures in grand mal epilepsy.
clostridium Any of a group of rod-
shaped bacteria. Clostridia are found in
soil and in the gastrointestinal tracts of
humans and animals. They produce
powerful toxins and are responsible for
potentially life-threatening diseases
such as botulism, tetanus, and gangrene.
clotrimazole A drug used to treat yeast
and fungal infections, especially can-
didiasis (see antifungal drugs).
clove oil An oil distilled from the dried
flower-buds of  EUGENIA CARYOPHYLLUS,
used mainly as a flavouring in pharma-
ceuticals. Clove oil is sometimes used
to relieve abdominal pain due to  flatu-
lence and as a remedy for toothache.
cloxacillin A penicillin-type antibiotic
used to treat infections with staphylo-
coccal bacteria (see penicillin drugs). 
clubbing Thickening and broadening of
the tips of the fingers and toes, usually
with increased curving of the nails. It is
associated with chronic lung diseases,
such as lung cancer, bronchiectasis, and
fibrosing  alveolitis; with certain heart
abnormalities; and, occasionally, with
Crohn＊s disease and ulcerative colitis. 
club-foot A deformity of the foot, pre-
sent from birth (see talipes).
cluster headaches Brief but severe
headaches that recur up to several times
a day over a few days. Cluster head-
aches affect one side of the head or
face. The cause is uncertain but they
may be due to dilation of blood vessels
in the brain as in migraine. Beta-blocker
drugs may be given to reduce the sever-
ity and frequency of cluster headaches.
CNS An abbreviation for central nervous
system (the brain and spinal cord).
CNS stimulants Drugs that increase
mental alertness (see stimulant drugs).
coagulation, blood The main mecha-
nism by which blood clots are formed,
involving a complex series of reactions
in the blood plasma (see blood clotting). 
coal tar A thick, black, sticky substance
distilled from coal. It is a common
ingredient of ointments and medicinal
shampoos prescribed for skin and scalp
conditions such as  psoriasis and some
forms of dermatitis and eczema.
co-amoxiclav A penicillin drug containing
a mixture of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid.
Because it is a more powerful antibiotic
than amoxicillin alone, co-amoxiclav is
used to treat infections caused by
amoxicillin-resistant strains of bacteria.
coarctation of the aorta A congenital
heart defect of unknown cause, in which
there is narrowing in a section of the
aorta that supplies blood to the lower
body and legs. In response, the heart
has to work harder, causing  hyperten-
sion in the upper part of the body.
Symptoms usually appear in early child-
hood  and include headache, weakness
after exercise, cold legs, and, rarely,
breathing difficulty and swelling of the
legs due to  heart failure. Associated
abnormalities include a heart murmur,
weak or absent pulse in the groin, lack
of synchronization between groin and
wrist pulses, and higher blood pressure
in the arms than in the legs. X-rays con-
firm the diagnosis. Corrective surgery is
usually performed at 4每8 years of age.
COARCTATION OF THE AORTA CLONE
C134
cobalamin A  cobalt-containing com-
plex molecule, part of vitamin B12. 
cobalt A metallic element and a con-
stituent of  vitamin B12. A radioactive
form of cobalt is used in radiotherapy.
cocaine A drug obtained from the leaves
of the coca plant  ERYTHROXYLON COCA,
once used as a local anaesthetic (see
anaesthesia, local) for minor surgical
procedures. Cocaine affects the brain,
producing euphoria and increased ener-
gy. Because of its effects, cocaine is
subject to  drug abuse. Continued use
can lead to psychological  dependence
(see drug dependence), and psychosis if
high doses are taken. Regular inhaling
of the drug can damage the lining of the
nose. Overdose can cause seizures and
cardiac arrest. ※Crack＊＊, a purified form of
cocaine, produces a more intense reac-
tion and has caused deaths due to
adverse effects on the heart. 
cocci Spherical bacteria,  some of which
are responsible for certain infections in
humans (see  staphylococcal infections;
streptococcal infections).
coccydynia A pain in the region of the
coccyx. Coccydynia may result from a
blow to the base of the spine in a fall,
from prolonged pressure due to poor
posture when sitting, or the use of the
lithotomy position during childbirth.
The pain usually eases in time. Treat-
ment may include heat, injections of a
local anaesthetic, and manipulation.
coccyx A small triangular bone made up
of 4 tiny bones fused together at the base
of the spine. Together with a larger bone
called the sacrum, it forms the back sec-
tion of the  pelvis. There is very little
relative movement between the coccyx
and sacrum. Later in life, they common-
ly become fused together.
cochlea The spiral-shaped organ situat-
ed in the labyrinth of the  inner ear that
transforms sound vibrations into nerve
impulses for transmission to the brain,
enabling hearing. 
cochlear implant A device used to
treat profoundly deaf people who are
not helped by hearing aids. A cochlear
implant consists of tiny electrodes sur-
gically implanted in the cochlea deep in
the inner ear and a receiver that is
embedded in the skull just behind and
above the ear. A microphone, sound
processor, and transmitter are worn
externally. A cochlear implant does not
restore normal hearing, but it enables
patterns of sound to be detected. Com-
bined with lip-reading, it may enable
speech to be understood. 
co-codamol A compound analgesic drug
containing paracetamol and codeine. 
codeine An opioidanalgesic drug derived
from the opium poppy plant. Codeine is
a useful treatment for mild to moderate
pain and may be used in combination
with other opioid analgesics. It is also
used as a cough remedy and as an anti-
diarrhoeal drug. It may cause dizziness
and drowsiness, especially if taken with
alcohol. Taken long-term, codeine may
cause constipation and be habit-forming.
cod-liver oil An oil obtained from the
liver of fresh cod, which is a valuable
source of vitamin A and vitamin D. 
COBALAMIN COD-LIVER OIL
C
Pubis
Ischium
Coccyx
PELVIS
Pelvic 
inlet
Ilium
COCCYX
Pubic 
symphysis
Outer
ear
Middle
ear
Inner
ear
Semicircular canal
COCHLEA
LOCATION
INNER EAR
Cochlea
Cochlea135
coeliac disease An uncommon condition
in which the lining of the small intestine
is damaged due to  hypersensitivity to
gluten, a protein found in wheat,rye, and
some other cereals. Damage to the intes-
tinal lining causes malabsorption, weight
loss, and vitamin and mineral deficiencies
that can lead to anaemia and skin prob-
lems. Faeces are bulky and foul-smelling.
The disease tends to run in families and
varies in severity. In babies, symptoms
usually develop within 6 months of the
introduction of gluten into the diet. The
baby may become listless and irritable,
develop vomiting and acute diarrhoea,
and become dehydrated and seriously
ill. In adults, symptoms such as tired-
ness, breathlessness, diarrhoea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, and swelling of the
legs may develop gradually over months.
A chronic, distinctive rash called dermati-
tis herpetiformis may develop. Some
people suffer damage to the intestinal
lining but never develop symptoms.
Diagnosis is made by blood, urine,
and faeces tests and  jejunal biopsies, in
which small samples of the lining of the
intestine are taken for examination.
Coeliac disease is treated by a lifelong
gluten-free diet, which usually relieves
symptoms within weeks of introduction.
co-dydramol A compound analgesic con-
taining paracetamol and dihydrocodeine.
cognitive每behavioural therapy A meth-
od of treating psychological disorders
such as  depression based on the idea
that problems arise from a person＊s faulty
cognitions (erroneous ways of perceiv-
ing the world and oneself). In cognitive每
behavioural therapy, the patientis helped
to identify negative or false cognitions
and then encouraged to try out new
thought strategies. 
coil Any of the various types of intraute-
rine contraceptive device (see IUD). 
coitus Another term for sexual intercourse.
coitus interruptus A method of contra-
ception (see  contraception, withdrawal
method of) in which the male partner
withdraws his penis from the vagina
before ejaculation occurs. Coitus inter-
ruptus is unreliable because sperm can
be released before orgasm occurs, and
it may cause  psychosexual dysfunction
in men and women.
colchicine A drug extracted from the
autumn crocus flower used to treat acute
attacks of gout and to reduce their fre-
quency. Side effects include vomiting
anddiarrhoea.
cold, common A common viral infec-
tion that causes inflammation of the
mucous membranes lining the nose and
throat. Symptoms include a stuffy or
runny nose, sore throat, headache, and
cough. The symptoms of a common
cold usually intensify over 24每48 hours,
unlike those of  influenza, which worsen
rapidly over a few hours. 
There are at least 200 highly conta-
gious viruses that are known to cause
the common cold. These viruses are
easily transmitted in the minute air-
borne drolets sprayed from the coughs
or sneezes of infected people. In many
cases, the viruses are also spread to the
nose and throat by way of hand-to-hand
contact with an infected person or by
way of objects that have becom con-
taminated with the virus.
Most colds clear up within about a
week. In some cases, infection spreads
and causes  laryngitis,  tracheitis, acute
bronchitis,  sinusitis, or  otitis media. In
these cases, a more serious secondary
bacterial infection may follow. Antibiotic
drugs may be needed if this happens.
cold injury Localized tissue damage
caused by chilling, the most serious
form of which is frostbite. Cold injury is
distinct from hypothermia, which refers
to chilling of the whole body.
In frostbite, an area of skin and flesh
becomes frozen, hard, and white as a
result of exposure to very cold, dry air.
Sometimes there is restriction of the
blood supply to the affected area.
Another type of cold injury,  immersion
foot, occurs when the legs and feet are
kept cold and damp for hours or days.
The main risk of both conditions is that
blood flow will be slowed so much that
the tissues will die, leading to gangrene.
Less serious forms of cold injury
include chilblains and chapped skin.
cold remedies Preparations for the relief
of symptoms of the common cold  (see
cold, common). The main ingredientis
usually a mild  analgesic drug, such as
paracetamol or  aspirin, which helps to
COLD REMEDIES COELIAC DISEASE
C136
relieve aches and pains. Other common
ingredients include  antihistaminedrugs
and decongestantdrugs to reduce nasal
congestion;  caffeine, which acts as a
mild stimulant; and vitaminC. 
cold sore A small skin blister, usually
around the mouth, commonly caused
by a strain of the  herpes simplex virus
called HSV1 (herpes simplex virus type
1). The first attack of the virus may be
symptomless or may cause a flu-like ill-
ness with painful mouth and lip ulcers
called gingivostomatis. The virus then lies
dormant in nerve cells, but may occa-
sionally be reactivated and cause cold
sores. Reactivation may occur after ex-
posure to hot sunshine or a cold wind,
during a common cold or other infection,
or in women around the time of their
menstrual periods. Prolonged attacks can
occur in people with reduced immunity
to infection due to illness or  treatment
with immunosuppressant drugs.
In many cases, an outbreak of cold
sores is preceded by tingling in the lips,
followed by the formation of small blis-
ters that enlarge, causing itching and
soreness.Within a few days they burst
and becomeencrusted. Most disappear
within a week. The antiviral drug  aci-
clovir in a cream may prevent cold sores
if used at the first sign of tingling. 
colecalciferol An alternative name for
vitamin D3 (see vitamin D).
colectomy The surgical removal of part
or all of the colon. Colectomy is used in
severe cases of diverticulardisease or to
remove a cancerous tumour in the colon
or a narrowed part of the intestine that
is obstructing the passage of faeces. A
total colectomy is carried out when
ulcerativecolitis cannot be controlled by
drugs, and may be used in cases of
familial polyposis.
In a partial colectomy, the diseased
section of the colon is removed, and the
ends of the severed colon are joined. A
temporary  colostomy may be required
until the rejoined colon has healed. In a
total colectomy, the whole of the large
intestine is removed, with or without
the rectum. If the rectum is removed, an
ileostomy may be performed. The bowel
usually functions normally after a par-
tial colectomy. In a total colectomy, the
reduced ability of the intestines to ab-
sorb water from the faeces can result
in diarrhoea. Antidiarrhoealdrugs may
therefore be required. 
colestyramine A  lipid-lowering drug
used to treat some types of  hyperlipi-
daemia. The drug is also used to treat
diarrhoea due to excessive amounts of
undigested fats in the faeces in disor-
ders such as Crohn＊s disease.
colic A severe, spasmodic pain that
occurs in waves of increasing intensity.
(See also colic, infantile.)
colic, infantile Episodes of irritability,
and excessive crying in otherwise
healthy infants, thought to be due to
spasm in the intestines. A baby with an
attack of colic cries or screams inces-
santly, draws up the legs towards the
stomach, and may become red in the face
and pass wind. Colic tends to be worse
in the evenings. The condition is dis-
tressing but harmless.  Usually, it first
appears at 3每4 weeks and clears up with-
out treatment by the age of 12 weeks.
colistin One of the  polymyxin group of
antibiotic drugs used in  topical prepara-
tions for eye and ear conditions. It is
only used to treat systemic infections
that are resistant to other antibiotics.
The drug may cause damage to the kid-
neys and nerve tissue. 
colitis Inflammation of the  colon caus-
ing diarrhoea, usually with blood and
mucus. Other symptoms may include
abdominal pain and fever. Colitis may
be due to infection by various types of
microorganism, such as  camphlobacter
and  shigella bacteria, viruses, or  amoe-
bae.A form of colitis may be provoked
by  antibiotic drugs destroying bacteria
that normally live in the intestine and
allowing CLOSTRIDIUM DIFFICILE,a bacte-
ria that causes irritation, to proliferate.
Colitis is a feature of  ulcerativecolitis
and Crohn＊sdisease.
Investigations into colitis may include
examining a faecal sample, sigmoidoscopy
or colonoscopy, biopsy of inflamed areas
or ulcers, and a barium enema (see bari-
um X-ray examinations). If the cause is
an infection, antibiotics may be needed.
Crohn＊s disease and ulcerative colitis are
treated with corticosteroid and immuno-
suppressantdrugs, and a special diet. 
COLD SORE COLITIS
C137
collagen A tough, fibrous  protein. Col-
lagen is the body＊s major structural
protein, forming an important part of
tendons, bones, and connective tissue.
collagen diseases See connective tissue
diseases.
collarbone The common name for the
clavicle.
collar, orthopaedic A soft foam or
stiffened device that is worn to treat
pain or instability of the neck. 
Colles＊ fracture A break in the  radius
(one of the lower-arm bones) just above
the wrist, in which the wrist and hand are
displaced backwards, restricting move-
ment and causing swelling and severe
pain. The fracture is usually the result of
putting out a hand to lessen theimpact
of a fall. The broken bones are manipulat-
ed back into position, and set in a  cast.
Healing takes up to 6 weeks. Hand and
wrist movements usually return to normal,
but there may be minor wrist deformity. 
colloid A state of matter similar to a
suspension (insoluble particles of a sub-
stance suspended in a liquid). Particles
in a suspension are large and heavy
enough to be separated from the liquid
in a  centrifuge. A colloid has smaller,
lighter particles that can only be sep-
arated out of a liquid by spinning at a very
high speed. In medicine,  plasma pro-
teins are separated from blood and used
in colloid preparations to treat shock. 
Colloid also refers to the protein-
containing material in the thyroid gland.
colon The major part of the large  intes-
tine. The colon is a segmented tube,
about 1.3m long and 6.5cm wide, that
forms a large loop in the abdomen. It
consists of 4 sections: the ascending,
transverse, and descending colons, and
the S-shaped sigmoid colon, which con-
nects with the rectum. The main functions
of the colon are to absorb water and
mineral salts from the digested material
passed on from the small intestine and
to concentrate the waste material for
expulsion as faeces. The colon consists
of 4 layers: a tough outer membrane; a
layer of muscles that contract and relax
to move the contents along (see  peri-
stalsis); a submucous coat containing
blood vessels that absorb water and
salts; and finally an innermost layer
that produces  mucus to lubricate the
passage of material. (See also digestive
system; intestine, disorders of.)
colon, cancer of A  malignant tumour
of the colon. First symptoms of the dis-
ease include an inexplicable change in
bowel movements (either constipation
or diarrhoea), blood mixed in with the
faeces, and pain in the lower abdomen.
Sometimes, there are no symptoms until
the tumour has grown big enough to
cause an obstruction in the intestine
(see  intestine, obstruction of) or perfo-
rate it (see perforation).
A genetic basis has been found for
some types of colon cancer. However,in
most cases, the precise cause is un-
known. Contributory factors include diet:
eating a lot of meat and fatty foods and
not enough fibre may increase the risk.
The disease often occurs in association
with other diseases of the colon, such
as ulcerativecolitis and familial polyposis.
The chances of cure depend critically on
early diagnosis. Screening for this cancer
includes an occult blood test; if the test is
positive, sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy
may be carried out. In most cases of colon
cancer, a partial colectomy is performed. 
colon, disorders of See  intestine, dis-
orders of.
colon, irritable See irritable bowel syn-
drome.
colonoscopy Examination of the inside
of the  colon by means of a flexible,
fibre-optic viewing instrument called a
colonoscope, which is introduced through
the  anus and guided along the colon.
Colonoscopy is used to investigate symp-
toms such as bleeding from the anus
and to look for disorders such as colitis,
polyps, and cancer. Instruments may be
passed through the colonoscope to take
biopsy specimens or to remove polyps. 
colon, spastic See  irritable bowel syn-
drome.
colostomy An operation in which part
of the colon is brought through an inci-
sion in the abdominal wall and formed
into a stoma, an artificial opening through
which faeces are discharged into a bag
attached to the skin. A temporary colos-
tomy may be performed at the same
time as a  colectomy to allow the colon
to heal without faeces passing through
COLOSTOMY COLLAGEN
C138
it. The colostomy is closed when the
rejoined colon has healed. A permanent
colostomy is needed if the rectum or
anus has been removed. 
colostrum A thick, yellowish fluid pro-
duced by the breasts during the first few
days after childbirth. Colostrum is then
replaced by breast milk. Colostrum con-
tains less fat and sugar but more
minerals and protein than breast milk.
It also has a high content of  lympho-
cytes and  immunoglobulins, which help
to protect the baby from infection. 
colour blindness See  colour vision
deficiency.
colour vision The ability to see differ-
ent parts of the colour spectrum. Light
perceived by the human eye consists of
electromagnetic radiation (energy waves)
with a spectrum of different wavelengths
between about 400 and 700 nanometres.
Different wavelengths produce sensations
of violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow,
orange, and red when they fall on the
retina and stimulate nerve signals,
which are processed in the brain.
As light falls on the retina, it strikes
light-sensitive cells called rods and cones.
The rods can detect all visible light, but
only the cones can distinguish colour.
There are 3 types of cones: red-sensitive,
blue-sensitive, and green-sensitive. Each
responds more strongly to a particular
part of the light spectrum. Because the
cones are most concentrated in a central
area of the retina called the  fovea,
colour vision is  most accurate for
objects viewed directly  and is poor at
the  edges of vision. When light hitsa
cone, it causes the cone to emit an elec-
trical signal, which passes to the brain
via the  optic nerve. Colour perception
requires a minimum level of light,
below which everything is seen as
shades of grey. (See also  colour vision
deficiency; eye; perception; vision.)
colour vision deficiency Any abnor-
mality in  colour vision that causes
difficulty distinguishing between certain
colours. Total absence of colour vision
(monochromatism) is rare. The most
common types of colour vision deficiency
are reduced discrimination of red and
green. Most cases of red and green
colour vision deficiency are caused by
defects in the light-sensitive cells in the
retina. These defects are usually inherit-
ed, although occasionally defectsare
caused by retinal or optic nerve dis-
eases or injury. The inherited defects
tend to be sex-linked (see genetic disor-
ders), which means that the majority of
sufferers are male. A person with a
severegreen deficiency has difficulty dis-
tinguishing oranges, greens, browns,
and pale reds. In severe red deficiency,
all reds appear dull. A much rarer defi-
ciency in which blue cannot be
distinguished may be inherited or may
be due to degeneration of the retina or
optic nerve.
colposcopy Visual inspection of the cervix
and  vagina using a magnifying instru-
ment called a colposcope. Colposcopy
is carried out to look for the presence of
COLOSTRUM COLPOSCOPY
C
Colon
Colon
Rectum
LOCATION
Small
intestine
TEMPORARYCOLOSTOMY
PERMANENTCOLOSTOMY
Colon
Muscle
Muscle
Opening on
skin surface
Healing
colectomy
site
Edge stitched
to surface of
skin
COLOSTOMY
Opening on
skin surface
Edge stitched to
surface of skin
Skin139
areas of precancerous tissue (see dyspla-
sia)or of early cervical cancer (see cervix,
cancer of).
coma A state of  unconsciousness and
unresponsiveness to external stimuli (for
example, pinching) or internal  stimuli
(such as a full bladder). Coma results
from disturbance or damage to areas of
the involved in conscious activity or
maintenance of consciousness 每 in par-
ticular, parts of the cerebrum, upper parts
of the brainstem, and central regions of
the brain, especially the  limbic system.
There are varying depths of coma. Even
people in deep comas may show some
automatic responses, such as breathing
unaided and blinking. If the lower brain-
stem is damaged, vital functions are
impaired, and artificial ventilation and
maintenance of the circulation are re-
quired. With medical care, a person may
be kept alive for many years in a deep
coma (persistent vegetative state) pro-
vided the brainstem is still functioning.
Complete irreversible loss of brainstem
function leads to brain death.
combination drug A preparation con-
taining more than one active substance. 
comedo Another name for a blackhead.
commensal A usually harmless bacteri-
um or other organism that normally
lives in or on the body. 
commode A portable chair that con-
tains a removable toilet bowl in its seat.
communicable disease Any disease due
to a microorganism or parasite that can
be transmitted from one person to anoth-
er. (See also contagious; infectious disease.)
compartment syndrome A painful
cramp due to compression of a group of
muscles within a confined space. It may
occur when muscles are enlarged due to
intensive training or injury such as shin
splints. Cramps induced by exercise usu-
ally disappear when exercise is stopped.
Severe cases may require  fasciotomy  to
improve blood flow and prevent devel-
opment of a permanent contracture. 
compensation neurosis A supposed
psychological reaction to injury affected
by the prospect of financial compensa-
tion. In some cases, the condition may
delay physical recovery.
complement A collection of proteins in
bloodplasma that helps to destroy for-
eign cells and is an important part of
the immune system. 
complementary medicine A group of
therapies, often described as ※alterna-
tive§, which are now increasingly used to
complement or to act as an alternative
to conventional medicine. They fall into
3 broad categories: touch and movement
(as in acupuncture, massage, and reflex-
ology); medicinal (as in  naturopathy,
homeopathy. and Chinese medicine); and
psychological (as in  biofeedback,  hyp-
notherapy, and meditation).
COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE COMA
C
Colposcope
allows doctor
to view cervix Leg support
COLPOSCOPY
Monitor shows
view through
colposcope140
complex A term used in medicine to
mean a group or combination of related
signs and symptoms that form a syn-
drome (as in Eisenmenger complex), or
a collection of substances of similar
structure or function (as in  vitamin B
complex). In psychology, a complex (for
example, the  Oedipus complex) is a
group of unconscious ideas and memo-
ries that have emotional importance.
compliance The degree  to which  pat-
ients follow medical advice.
complication A condition resulting from
a preceding disorder or from its treatment.
compos mentis Latin for ※of sound mind＊＊.
compress A pad of lint or linen applied
under pressure to an area of skin. Cold
compresses soaked in ice-cold water or
wrapped around ice help to reduce pain,
swelling, and bleeding under the skin
after an injury (see  ice pack). Hot com-
presses increase the circulation and
help to bring boils to a head. A dry com-
press may be used to stop bleeding
from a wound or may be coated with
medication to help treat infection. 
compression syndrome A collection
of localized symptoms such numbness,
tingling, discomfort, and muscle weak-
ness caused by pressure on a nerve. 
compulsive behaviour See obsessive每
compulsive disorder. 
computed tomography Another name
for CT scanning.
computer-aided diagnosis The use
of computer technology in diagnostic
tests and procedures. Probability-based
computer systems store information on
thousands of cases of different disorders
detailing exact type, location, duration,
symptoms, medical history, and diagno-
sis. A patient＊s symptoms and medical
history can be entered into a computer,
which then compares the details with
existing data and produces a list of the
most likely diagnoses. Such technology
is not currently in common use in hos-
pitals, but is of value for people isolated
from medical services, such as oil-rig
crews. Computers programmed to inter-
pret visual data, such as abnormal cells,
have potential use in certain types of
blood test and cervical smear tests. Com-
putersare  also used in investigative
procedures such as CT scanning and MRI.
conception The fertilization of a woman＊s
ovum by a man＊s  sperm, followed by
implantation of the resultant blastocyst
in the lining of the uterus thus starting a
pregnancy. (See also contraception.) 
concussion Brief unconsciousness due to
disturbance of the electrical activity in
the brain following a violent blow to the
head or neck. Common symptoms fol-
lowing concussion include confusion,
inability to remember events immedia-
tely before the injury, dizziness, blurred
vision, and vomiting. If symptoms persist,
or new ones develop, such as drowsiness,
difficulty breathing, repeated vomiting, or
visual disturbances, they could signify brain
damage or an  extradural haemorrhage.
Repeated concussion  can cause  punch-
drunk syndrome. (See also head injury.) 
conditioning The formation of a speci-
fic response to a specific  stimulus. In
classical conditioning, a stimulus that
consistently evokes a particular response
is paired repeatedly with a second stim-
ulus that would not normally produce the
response. Eventually, the second stimu-
lus begins to produce the response
whether the first stimulus is present or
not. In operant conditioning, attempts to
modify behaviour are made through a
system of rewards and/or punishments. 
The theory that inappropriate behav-
iour patterns  in some psychological
disorders are learned through condi-
tioning and can be modified by the
same process underlies behavioural
psychology (see behaviour therapy).
condom A barrier method of contracep-
tion in the form of a thin latex rubber or
plastic sheath placed over the penis be-
fore sexual  intercourse. Condoms also
offer some degree of protection against
sexually transmitted infections. 
condom, female A barrier method of
contraception in the form of a sheath
inserted into the  vagina before sexual
intercourse. It also offers some protection
against sexually transmitted infections.
conduct disorders Repetitive and per-
sistent patterns of aggressive and/or
antisocial behaviour, such as vandal-
ism, substance abuse, and persistent
lying, that occur in childhood or adoles-
cence. (See also  behavioural problems
in children; adolescence.)
COMPLEX CONDUCT DISORDERS
C141
conductive deafness Deafness caused
by faulty conduction of sound from the
outer to the inner ear.
condyloma acuminatum See  warts,
genital.
cone A type of light-sensitive cell in the
retina of the eye. Cones play a major
role in colour vision.
cone biopsy A surgical procedure in
which a conical or cylindrical section of
the lower part of the cervix is removed.
A cone biopsy is performed after an
abnormal  cervical smear test result if
the exact precancerous or cancerous
area (see  cervix, cancer of) cannot be
identified by colposcopy. 
confabulation The use of a fictional
story to make up for gaps in memory.
The phenomenon occurs most com-
monly in chronic alcoholics suffering
from  Wernicke每Korsakoff syndrome. It
may also occur with head injuries.
confidentiality The ethical principle that
a doctor does not disclose information
given in confidence by a patient.
The patient＊s consent is needed before
a doctor supplies confidential informa-
tion to an insurance company, employer,
or lawyer. However, doctors must disclose
information when required to by law or
when faced with injuries or disorders that
indicate a serious crime. Doctors are also
required to notify specified infectious dis-
eases. Treatment of young children is
usually discussed with the parents, but
an older child＊s request for confidential-
ity is generally respected if the doctor
feels that he or she is competent enough
to understand the issues involved. 
confusion An acute or chronic disorga-
nized mental state in which the abilities
to remember, think clearly, and reason
are impaired. Acute confusion can arise
as a symptom of  delirium, in which
brain activity is affected by fever, drugs,
poisons, or injury. People with acute con-
fusion may also have hallucinations and
behave violently. Chronic confusion is
often associated with  alcohol depen-
dence, long-term use of antianxiety drugs,
and certain physically based mental dis-
orders. Many of the conditions that cause
chronic confusion (for example dementia)
are progressive. Features include absent-
mindedness, poorshort-term memory,
and a tendency to be repetitive. If the
underlying cause of confusion can be
treated, there may be marked improve-
ment. Sedative drugs can be of benefit in
acute confusion. 
congenital Present at birth. Congenital
abnormalities (sometimes called  birth
defects) are either inherited or result
from damage or infection occurring in
the uterus or at the time of birth.
congenital adrenal hyperplasia See
adrenal hyperplasia, congenital.
congestion A term that usually refers
to the accumulation of excess blood, tis-
sue fluid, or lymph in part of the body. A
major cause of congestion is increased
blood flow to an area due to inflamma-
tion. Another cause is reduced drainage
of blood from an affected area, as can
occur in heart failure, in venous disorders
such as varicose veins, and in lymphatic
disorders. (See also nasal congestion.)
congestive heart failure See  heart
failure.
conjunctiva The transparent membrane
covering the  sclera (white of the eye)
and lining the inside of the eyelids.
Cells in the conjunctiva produce a fluid
that lubricates the lids and the cornea. 
conjunctivitis Inflammation of the con-
junctiva, causing redness, discomfort, and
discharge from the affected eye. There
are 2 common types: infective conjunc-
tivitis, caused by bacteria or viruses;
and allergic conjunctivitis, which is an
allergic response to substances such as
cosmetics and pollen. Both types have
similar symptoms but in infective con-
junctivitis the discharge contains pus
CONJUNCTIVITIS CONDUCTIVE DEAFNESS
C
LOCATION
Lining of uterus
Cervix
Vagina
CONEBIOPSY
Area of tissue 
removed
Uteruspropulsionof waste matter through the
colon. Other common causes include lack
of regular bowel movements due to poor
toilet-training in childhood or repeatedly
ignoring the urge to move the bowels.
Constipation in the elderly may be due to
immobility or to weakness of the muscles
of the abdomen and the pelvic floor.
Self-help measures such as establishing
a regular bowel routine, increasing the
amount of fibre in the diet, and drinking
more fluids are usually beneficial. Pro-
longed use of  laxative drugs can impair
the normal functioning of the colon. 
Constipation is occasionally a symptom
of an underlying disorder, especially if it
is part of a persistent change in bowel
habits after the age of 40, or if it is
accompanied by blood in the faeces, pain
on moving the bowels, or weight loss.
Conditions that may result in constipa-
tion include haemorrhoids, anal fissure,
irritable bowel syndrome, and narrowing
of the colon in, for example, diverticular
disease or cancer (see colon, cancer of). 
constriction A narrowed area, or the
process of narrowing. 
contact dermatitis A type of dermatitis
caused by an allergic reaction to a sub-
stance that is in contact with the skin
and which would not cause a reaction
in most people exposed to it. Common
causes include nickel and rubber. (See
also irritant dermatitis.)
contact lenses Very thin, shell-like, trans-
parent discs fitted on the cornea of the
eye to correct defective vision. General-
ly, contact lenses are used to correct
myopia (shortsightedness) and hyperme-
tropia (longsightedness). There are several
CONTACT LENSES
and may cause the eyelids to be stuck
together on waking. In allergic conjunc-
tivitis, the discharge is clear and the
eyelids are often swollen.
Bacterial infections are treated with
antibiotic eyedropsor ointment. Viral
conjunctivitis often disappears without
treatment. Allergic conjunctivitis may
be relieved by eyedrops containing an
antihistamine or a corticosteroid drug.
Other forms of conjunctivitis include
neonatal ophthalmia,  keratoconjunctivi-
tis, and trachoma.
connective tissue The material that
supports, binds, or separates the vari-
ous structures of the body. Tendons and
cartilage are made up of connective tis-
sue, and it forms the matrix (ground
substance) of bone and the nonmuscu-
lar structures of arteries and veins.
connective tissue diseases Types of
autoimmune disorders that often affect
blood vessels and produce secondary
connective tissue damage. They include
rheumatoidarthritis, systemic  lupus
erythematosus, polyarteritisnodosa, scle-
roderma, and dermatomyositis.
Conn＊s syndrome A disorder caused
by the secretion of excessive amounts
of the hormone  aldosterone by a non-
cancerous tumour of one of the adrenal
glands. (See also aldosteronism.)
consciousness A state of alertness in
which a person is fully aware of his or her
thoughts, surroundings, and intentions.
consent The legal term describing a pa-
tient＊s agreement to a doctor performing
an operation, arranging drug treatment,
or carrying out diagnostic tests. Strictly,
consent is valid only if the patient has
been fully informed about the purpose of
the procedure, the likely  outcome, and
any complications and side effects. Con-
sent cannot be given by children or by
people with serious mental disorders,
but a relative may give or withhold con-
sent on their behalf. The patient＊s
consent is also needed before a doctor
supplies confidential information to an
insurance company, employer, or lawyer.
constipation The infrequent or difficult
passing of hard, dry faeces. Constipation
is usually harmless. The most common
cause is insufficient fibre in the diet (see
fibre, dietary), because fibre assists the
142
CONNECTIVE TISSUE  CONTACT LENSES
C
Tear film
Soft
contact
lens
Cornea
Conjunctiva
Lens of
eye RIGIDLENS
SOFTLENSinterruptus; hormonal methods, includ-
ing the use of  oral contraceptives,
implants, and injections (see contracep-
tives, injectable); intrauterine devices
(see  IUDs); postcoital methods (see
contraception, emergency); or steriliza-
tion of the male (see  vasectomy) or
female (see sterilization, female).
contraception, barrier methods of
The use of a device and/or a chemical to
stop sperm reaching an ovum, prevent-
ing  fertilization and pregnancy. Barrier
methods also help prevent the sexual
transmission of diseases such as AIDS,
genital herpes (see herpes, genital), and
viral hepatitis(see hepatitis, viral).
The male  condom is one of the most
widely used barrier contraceptives. Fe-
male condoms (see condom, female) are
similar to, but larger than, male condoms.
Other female barrier methods include
the diaphragm (see diaphragm, contra-
ceptive), a hemispherical dome of thin
rubber with a metal spring in the rim to
hold it in place against the vaginal wall,
blocking the entrance to the cervix. It is
used with a  spermicide. A cervical cap
(see cap, cervical) is an alternative to the
diaphragm. The contraceptive sponge,
which is a disposable, circular, poly-
urethane foam sponge impregnated with
spermicide, is inserted high in the vagi-
na and left in place for at least 6 hours
after intercourse.
Spermicides, in the form of aerosol
foams, creams, gels, and pessaries, are
placed in the vagina as close as possible
to the cervix shortly before intercourse.
CONTRACEPTION, BARRIER
143
types. Hard plastic lenses give good
vision, are long-lasting and durable, inex-
pensive, and easy to maintain. However,
they are  sometimes difficult to tolerate
and may fall  out. Hard gas-permeable
lenses are more comfortable because
they allow oxygen to pass through to the
eye, but are less durable. Soft lenses are
the most comfortable because of their
high water content. Disposable soft lens-
esare for single-use only; extended
wear lenses are worn for up to a month.
Other types of lenses include rigid,
scleral lenses that cover the whole of
the front of the eye and are used to dis-
guise disfigurement due to injury or
disease; bifocal contact lenses; and
toric contact lenses with an uneven sur-
face curvature to correct astigmatism. 
Hard plastic contact lenses may cause
abrasion of the cornea if they are worn
for too long. Soft lens wearers some-
times develop sensitivity of the eyes and
lids. Other problems that may occur
with any type of contact lens include
infections and redness of the eye.
contact tracing A service, provided by
clinics treating sexually transmitted infec-
tions, in which contacts of a person
diagnosed as having sexually transmit-
tedinfection are traced and encouraged
to be examined and treated. Contact
tracing is also used in cases of infec-
tions such as  tuberculosis,  meningitis,
and imported tropical diseases.
contagious A term used to describe a
disease that can be transferred from per-
son to person by ordinary social contact.
All contagious diseases, such as the
common cold or chickenpox, are  infec-
tious. The term contagious does not apply
to the many  infectious diseases, such as
typhoid, syphilis, or AIDS, which are
spread by other means. 
contraception The control of fertility to
prevent pregnancy. Methods prevent ovu-
lation in the woman, stop  sperm  from
meeting an  ovum in the  fallopian tube
(preventing  fertilization), or prevent a
fertilized ovum implanting in the uterus. 
Methods of contraception include
total or periodic abstinence from sexual
intercourse (see  contraception, natural
methods of); barrier methods (see con-
traception, barrier methods of);  coitus
CONTRACEPTION, BARRIER METHODS OF  CONTACT TRACING
C
FEMALE
CONDOM
CERVICAL
CAP
DIAPHRAGM
MALE
CONDOMThe cervical mucus method attempts to
pinpoint the fertile period by observing
and charting the amount and appearance
of cervical mucus during the menstrual
cycle. Recognized changes in the mucus
occur before and often at ovulation. The
symptothermal method combines the
temperature and cervical mucus methods.
contraception, withdrawal method
of See coitus interruptus.
contraceptive Any agent that reduces
the likelihood of  conception. (See also
contraception.)
contraceptive implant A hormonal
method of contraception in which long-
acting contraceptive drugs are inserted
under the skin. An implant consists of a
small rod that steadily releases a  pro-
gestogendrug into the bloodstream. 
contraceptives, injectable A hormonal
method of contraception in which long-
acting  progestogen drugs are given by
injection every 2每3 months. Injectable
contraceptives are very effective but may
cause menstrual disturbances,  weight
gain, headaches, and nausea, especially
during the first few months of use.
contractions, uterine Spasms of rhyth-
mic, squeezing muscular activity affecting
the walls of the uterus during childbirth.
Regular contractions indicate the start
of  labour and increase in strength and
frequency throughout the first stage.
(See also Braxton Hicks＊ contractions.)
contracture A deformity caused by
shrinkage of tissue in the skin, muscles,
or tendons that may restrict movement
of joints. Skin contractures commonly
occur as a result of scarring following
extensive burns. Other types are caused
by inflammation and shrinkage of  con-
nective tissues. Examples are Dupuytren＊s
contracture and Volkmann＊s contracture.
contraindication Factors in a patient＊s
condition that would make it unwise to
pursue a certain line of treatment.
contrast medium A substance opaque
to  X-rays, introduced into hollow or
fluid-filled body parts to show them up
on X-ray film. Barium is one of the most
commonly used contrast media (see
barium X-ray examinations).
controlled drug One of a number of
drugs subject to restricted use because
of their potential for abuse. They include
Some spermicides should not be used
with rubber barrier devices. 
Mechanical and chemical means used
together correctly can be highly effec-
tive in preventing conception.
contraception, emergency Measures
to avoid pregnancy following unprotec-
ted sexual intercourse. There are 2 main
methods: hormonal and physical. In the
first,  oral contraceptives  (the ※morning
after§ pill) are taken in a high dose as
soon as possible, but not longer than
72 hours, after unprotected intercourse,
with a second dose taken 12 hours later.
They may be given as a high-dose pro-
gesterone-only pill or as a high-dose
combined (oestrogen and progesterone)
pill. In the physical method, an  IUD is
inserted by a doctor within 5 days of
unprotected intercourse.
contraception, hormonal methods
of The use by women of synthetic pro-
gestogen drugs, which are often combined
with synthetic  oestrogens, to prevent
pregnancy. These drugs suppress ovula-
tion and make cervical mucus thick and
impenetrable to sperm. They also cause
thinning of the endometrium(lining of the
uterus), which reduces the chance of a
fertilized egg implanting successfully. The
best-known form of hormonal contracep-
tionis  the contraceptive pill (see  oral
contraceptives). The hormones can also
begiven as contraceptive implants under
the skin, by injection (see  contracep-
tives, injectable), or be released by IUDs.
contraception, natural methods of
Methods of avoiding conception based
on attempts to pinpoint a woman＊s fer-
tile period around the time of ovulation,
so that sexual intercourse can be avoided
at this time. The calendar method is based
on the assumption that ovulation occurs
around 14 days before menstruation. Be-
cause of its high failure rate, it has been
largely superseded by other methods.
The temperature method is based on the
normal rise of a woman＊s body tempera-
ture in the second half of the menstrual
cycle, after ovulation has occurred. The
woman takes her temperature daily
using an ovulation thermometer. Sex is
considered to be only safe after there
has been a sustained temperature rise
for at least 3 days.
144
CONTRACEPTION, EMERGENCYCONTROLLED DRUG
Copiates such as  cocaine and morphine,
amfetaminedrugs, and barbiturate drugs.
controlled trial A method of testing
the effectiveness of new treatments or
comparing different treatments. In a
typical controlled drug trial, 2 compara-
ble groups of patients suffering from
the same illness are given courses of
apparently identical treatment. However,
only one group receives the new treat-
ment; the second control group is given
a placebo. Alternatively, the control group
may be given an established drug that
is already known to be effective. After a
predetermined period, the 2 groups are
assessed medically. Controlled trials must
be conducted ※blind＊＊ (the patients do not
know which treatment they are receiving).
In a ※double-blind＊＊ trial, neither the pa-
tients nor the doctors who assess them
know who is receiving which treatment.
contusion Bruising to the skin and
underlying tissues from an injury.
convalescence The recovery period fol-
lowing an illness or surgery during
which the patient regains strength
before returning to normal activities. 
conversion disorder A psychological
disorder in which repressed emotions
appear to be unconsciously converted
into physical symptoms such as blind-
ness, loss of speech, or paralysis. The
condition, formerly known as hysteria,
is generally treated with psychotherapy.
convulsion See seizure.
convulsion, febrile Twitching or jerking
of the limbs with loss of consciousness
that occurs in a child after a rapid rise
in temperature. Febrile convulsions are
common, usually affecting children be-
tween the ages of 6 months and 5 years.
Convulsions are caused by an immaturity
of the temperature-lowering mechanism
in the brain, allowing the temperature to
rise too rapidly in response to infections
such as measles or  influenza. Treatment
aims to lower the temperature by spong-
ingthe child＊s face and body with tepid
water and using a fan. Seizures can often
be prevented in susceptible children by
giving  paracetamol at the first signs of
fever. Most children who have seizures
suffer no ill effects. The risk of developing
epilepsy is very small but is increased in
children with a pre-existing abnormality
145
of the brain or nervous system, or chil-
dren with a family history of epilepsy. 
Cooley＊s anaemia See thalassaemia. 
COPD The abbreviation for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (see pul-
monary disease, chronic obstructive).
copper A metallic element that is an
essential part of several enzymes. Cop-
per is needed by the body only in
minute amounts (see  trace elements).
Copper excess may result from the rare
inherited disorder Wilson＊s disease.
co-proxamol An  analgesic drug con-
taining paracetamol and the weak opioid
analgesic dextropropoxyphene, widely
used to relieve mild to moderate pain
that has not responded to paracetamol
or other nonopioid analgesics alone. Side
effects are dizziness, drowsiness, con-
stipation, and nausea. The drug may be
habit-forming if taken over a long period. 
cordotomy An operation to divide bun-
dles of nerve fibres within the  spinal
cord to relieve persistent pain that has
not responded to other treatment. Cor-
dotomy is most frequently performed
for pain in the lower trunk and legs,
especially in people with cancer.
corn A small area of thickened skin on a
toe, caused by the pressure of a tight-
fitting shoe. Treatment is with a spongy
ring or corn pad to ease the pressure on
the corn, or the thickened skin can be
removed by a chiropodist.
cornea The transparent thin-walled dome
that forms the front of the eyeball. The
cornea is joined at its circumference to
the  sclera (white of the eye); the black
pupil and the coloured iris are visible
beneath it. The main functions of the
cornea are to help focus light-rays on to
CORNEA CONTROLLED TRIAL
C
CORNEA
Iris
Lens
Conjunctiva
Cornea
Retina146
the retina at the back of the eye and to
protect the front of the eye. It is kept
moist by tears produced by the lacrimal
gland and the mucus- and fluid-secret-
ing cells in the eyelids and conjunctiva.
cornea, disorders of  Injuries or dis-
eases affecting the cornea, the outer
shell of the eyeball. Injuries include
corneal abrasions, which sometimes be-
come infected and progress to a corneal
ulcer. Penetrating corneal injuries can
cause scarring, which may lead to im-
pairment of vision. Chemical injuries can
result from contact with a corrosive
substance and require immediate flush-
ing of the eye with water.
In actinic  keratopathy, the outer layer
of the cornea is damaged by ultraviolet
light. In exposure keratopathy, damage
is due to reduced protection by the tear
film and blink reflex. The cornea can also
be infected by viruses, bacteria, and fungi,
the herpes simplex virus being especially
dangerous. True inflammation of the cor-
nea  (called  keratitis) is uncommon as
the cornea contains no blood vessels.
Other disorders include: keratomalacia
as a result of vitamin A deficiency;  ker-
atoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye); corneal
dystrophies such as  keratoconus; and
oedema, in which fluid builds up in the
cornea and impairs vision. Rare con-
genitaldefects include microcornea
(smaller cornea than normal) or mega-
locornea (bigger than normal) and
buphthalmos, or ※ox-eye＊＊, in which the
entire eyeball is distended as a result of
glaucoma. Degenerative conditions of the
cornea such as calcium deposition, thin-
ning, and spontaneous ulceration occur
mainly in the elderly, and are more
common in previously damaged eyes.
corneal abrasion A scratch or defect
in the  epithelium (outer layer) of the
cornea caused by a small, sharp particle
in the eye (see eye, foreign body in) or
by an injury. Corneal abrasions usually
heal quickly but may cause severe pain
and  photophobia. Treatment includes
covering the eye with a patch, analgesic
drugs to relieve pain, and, if the eye
muscles go into spasm, eyedrops con-
taining cycloplegic drugs (which paralyse
the ciliary muscle, preventing accommo-
dation). Antibiotic eyedrops are usually
given to prevent bacterial infection,
which can lead to a corneal ulcer.
corneal graft The surgical transplanta-
tion of donor corneal tissue to replace a
damaged cornea. In most grafts, tissue is
taken from a human donor after death.
The success rate of corneal grafts is
generally high, because the cornea has
no blood vessels; this reduces access
for white blood cells, which can cause
rejection of the donor tissue.
corneal transplant See corneal graft.
corneal ulcer A break, erosion, or open
sore in the cornea commonly caused by
a corneal abrasion. It may also be due to
chemical damage, or infection with bac-
teria,  fungi, or viruses  (particularly with
the herpes viruses). Eye conditions such
as  keratoconjunctivitis sicca and eyelid
deformities such as  entropion or  ectro-
pion increase the risk of an ulcer.
Corneal ulcers are revealed by intro-
ducing  fluorescein dye into the eye.
Infections and predisposing eye condi-
tions are treated according to their
cause. A superficial, noninfectious ulcer
usually heals quickly; if it fails to do so,
it may be treated with a ※bandage＊＊ con-
tact lens or tarsorrhaphy. 
coronary Any structure that encircles
like a crown. The term usually refers to
the  coronary arteries. It is also some-
times used as a nonmedical term for a
heart attack (see myocardial infarction).
coronary artery Either of the 2 main
arteries that supply the tissues of the
heart with oxygen-rich blood. These are
CORNEA, DISORDERS OFCORONARY ARTERY 
C
Coronary
vein
Left
circumflex
artery
Inferior
vena cava
Right
main
coronary
artery
Pulmonary
veins
Left
anterior
descending
artery
CORONARY ARTERY
Left main
coronary
artery
Descending
aorta
Superior
vena cava
Aortaknown as the left and right main coro-
nary arteries and arise directly from the
aorta. The term coronary artery is also ap-
plied to any of the arteries that branch
off from the main coronary arteries, such
as the left circumflex artery and the left
anterior descending artery. Blockage of a
coronary artery as a result of atheroscle-
rosis can lead to myocardial infarction.
(See also coronary artery disease.)
coronary artery bypass A major heart
operation to bypass narrowed or blocked
coronary arteries using additional blood
vessels (such as a mammary  artery) to
improve blood flow to the heartmuscle.
This operation is used when symptoms
of coronary artery disease have not been
relieved by drugs or balloon angioplasty.
Before surgery, sites of blockage in the
arteries are identified using angiogra-
phy. In some cases, minimally invasive
surgery can be used, avoiding the need
to stop the heart and use a heart每lung
machine during the operation. The long
term outlook after a bypass is good, but
the grafted vessels may also eventually
become blocked by atherosclerosis.
coronary artery disease Narrowing
of the coronary arteries, which supply
blood to the heart, leading to damage
or malfunction of the heart. The most
common heart disorders due to coro-
nary artery disease are  angina pectoris
and myocardial infarction (heart attack). 
The usual cause of narrowing of the
arteries is atherosclerosis, in which fatty
plaques develop on the artery linings.
The vessel can become totally blocked if
a blood clot forms or lodges in the nar-
rowed area. Atherosclerosis has many
interrelated causes including smoking,
a high-fat diet, lack of exercise, being
overweight, and raised blood cholesterol
levels. Other factors include a genetic
predisposition and diseases such as
diabetes mellitus and hypertension. 
The first symptom of coronary artery
disease is frequently the chest pain of
angina. Treatment is with drugs such as
glyceryl trinitrate and other  nitrate
drugs,  beta-blockers,  calcium channel
blockers,  potassium  channel activators,
and vasodilator drugs. If drug treatment
fails to relieve the symptoms, or there is
extensive narrowing of the coronary
147
arteries, blood flow may be improved by
balloon  angioplasty or  coronary artery
bypass surgery.
coronary care unit A specialist ward
for the care of acutely ill patients who
may be suffering, or who have suffered,
a myocardial infarction (heart attack) or
another serious cardiovascular disorder. 
coronary heart disease An alterna-
tive name for coronary artery disease.
coronary thrombosis Narrowing or
blockage of one of the coronary arteries
by a  thrombus (blood clot), depriving a
section of the heart muscle of vital oxy-
gen. In most cases, the thrombus forms
in a blood vessel already narrowed by
atherosclerosis. Sudden blockage of a
coronary artery causes an acute  myo-
cardial infarction (heart attack). 
coroner A public officer appointed to
inquire into the cause of death when it
is unknown, or when it is suspected or
known to result from unnatural causes.
The coroner holds an inquest, some-
times before a jury. 
cor pulmonale Enlargement and strain
of the right side of the heart caused by
one of a number of chronic lung diseases.
Lung damage results in pulmonary hy-
pertension; the resultant ※back pressure§
strain on the heart may eventually cause
right-sided heart failure with oedema.
corpuscle Any minute body or cell, par-
ticularly red and white blood cells or
certain types of nerve endings.
corpus luteum A small tissue mass in
the ovary that develops from a ruptured
egg  follicle after  ovulation. The corpus
CORPUS LUTEUM CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS
C
CORPUSLUTEUM
Immature
egg follicle
Empty follicle 
(corpus luteum)
LOCATION
Mature egg
follicle
Egg
STRUCTUREOFANOVARY
Blood
vesselluteum secretes the female sex hormone
progesterone, which causes the lining of
the uterus to thicken in preparation for
implantation of a fertilized egg. If fertil-
ization does not occur, the corpus
luteum shrinks and dies.
corset A device worn around the trunk
to treat back pain and spinal injuries or
deformities. 
cortex The outer layer of certain organs,
such as the brain or kidneys. 
corticosteroid drugs A group of drugs
that are similar to the  corticosteroid
hormones produced by the  adrenal
glands. Corticosteroids are used as hor-
mone replacement therapy in Addison＊s
disease and when the  adrenal glands
or pituitary gland have been destroyed or
removed. They are also used to treat
inflammatory intestinal disorders such
as  ulcerative colitis and Crohn＊s disease
and as an urgent treatment for inflam-
mation in the artery supplying the retina
in temporal arteritis. Other uses include
treatment of  autoimmune diseases such
as systemic  lupus erythematosus and
rheumatoid arthritis, and treatment of
asthma,  eczema, and  allergic rhinitis.
Corticosteroid drugs are also used to
prevent organ rejection after  transplant
surgery and in the treatment of some
types of cancer, such as a  lymphoma or
leukaemia. Corticosteroid injections may
relieve pain in disorders such as  tennis
elbow and arthritis. 
Side effects are uncommon when cor-
ticosteroids are given as a cream or by
inhaler, but tablets taken in high doses
for long periods may cause  oedema,
hypertension,  diabetes mellitus,  peptic
ulcer,  Cushing＊s syndrome, inhibited
growth in children, and, in rare cases,
cataract or  psychosis. High doses also
impair the body＊s  immune system.
Long-term treatment suppresses pro-
duction of corticosteroid hormones by
the adrenal glands, and sudden with-
drawal may lead to adrenal failure.
corticosteroid hormones A group of
hormones produced by the  adrenal
glands that control the body＊s use of
nutrients and the excretion of salts and
water in the urine. 
corticotropin An alternative name for
ACTH (adrenocorticotrophic hormone).
148
cortisol Another name for  hydrocorti-
sone, a corticosteroid hormone produced
by the adrenal glands. 
cortisone A synthetic corticosteroid drug
used to reduce inflammation in severe
allergic, rheumatic, and connective tissue
diseases and as a replacement hormone
in Addison＊s disease. Side effects include
peptic ulcer and bleeding in the stomach.
coryza A term for the nasal symptoms
of the common cold (see cold, common).
cosmetic dentistry Procedures to im-
prove the appearance of the  teeth or
prevent further damage to the teeth
and/or gums. Cosmetic dentistry proce-
dures include: fitting an  orthodontic
appliance to correct teeth that are out of
alignment or where the bite is incorrect
(see malocclusion); fitting a crown;bond-
ing to treat chipped or stained teeth;
and bleaching of discoloured teeth.
cosmetic surgery An operation per-
formed to improve appearance rather
than to cure or treat disease. Cosmetic
surgery techniques include the removal
of skin blemishes or  dermabrasion;
rhinoplasty to alter the shape or size of
the nose;  face-lifts;  mammoplasty to
reduce or enlarge the breasts; body con-
tour surgery to remove excess body fat
and tissue;  hair transplants;  blepharo-
plasty to remove excess skin on the
eyelids; and mentoplasty to alter the size
or shape of the chin. All cosmetic
surgery carries the risk of side effects
from the anaesthetic, as well as of com-
plications of the procedure itself.
costalgia Pain around the chest due to
damage to a  rib or to one of the  inter-
costal nerves beneath the ribs. Damage
to an intercostal nerve most commonly
results from of an attack of the viral
infection herpes zoster (shingles). 
cot death See  sudden infant death syn-
drome.
co-trimoxazole An  antibacterial drug
containing trimethoprim and sulfa-
methoxazole. Because of potentially
seriously side effects, co-trimoxazole is
now used to treat certain infections
only when they cannot be treated with
other drugs. 
cough A reflex action that occurs as an
attempt to clear the airways of mucus,
sputum, a foreign body, or any other
CORSET COUGH
C149
irritants or blockages. A cough is pro-
ductive when it brings up mucus or
sputum and unproductive, or dry, whenit
does not. Many coughs are due to irrita-
tion of the airways by dust, smoke (see
cough, smoker＊s), or a viral infection of
the upper respiratory tract  (see  cold,
common;  laryngitis;  pharyngitis;  trache-
itis). Coughing is a feature of bronchitis,
asthma, pneumonia, and lung cancer.
Over-the-counter  cough remedies are
available; but, in general, they just ease
symptoms. More specific treatment is
directed at the underlying disorder. 
coughing up blood A symptom, medi-
cally known as haemoptysis, that is
caused by rupture of a blood vessel in
the air-ways, lungs, nose, or throat. The
coughed-up blood may appear as bright-
red or rusty-brown streaks, clots in the
sputum, a pinkish froth, or, more rarely,
blood alone. In all cases, medical assess-
ment is needed. Many disorders can
cause haemoptysis. The most common
are infections, such as  pneumonia or
bronchitis; and  congestion in and rup-
ture of blood vessels in the lungs due to
heart failure, mitral stenosis, or pulmon-
ary embolism. A cancerous tumour can
also produce haemoptysis by eroding
the wall of a blood vessel.
Investigations into coughing up blood
include chest X-ray, and, in some cases,
bronchoscopy. In about a 3rd of cases, no
underlying cause is found. Treatment
depends on the cause.
cough remedies Over-the-counter med-
ications for treating a  cough. There are
various preparations, but the effective-
ness of most is unproven.  Expectorant
cough remedies are purported to en-
courage expulsion of sputum. Cough
suppressants, which control the cough-
ing reflex, include some  antihistamine
drugs and  codeine. All cough suppres-
sants may cause drowsiness.
cough, smoker＊s A recurrent  cough in
smokers. The cough is usually triggered
by the accumulation of thick sputum in
the airways due to inflammation  caused
by smoking. Giving up smoking usually
stops the cough but it may take time. In
general, the longer a person has been
smoking, the longer it will take. Smok-
ers with a cough should seek medical
advice, particularly  if their cough
changes, because smoking is associated
with lung cancer (see tobacco-smoking).
counselling Advice and psychological
support from health professionals to
help people deal with personal difficul-
ties. Counselling is used to address
problems at school, work, or in the fam-
ily; provide advice on medical problems
and sexual and marital problems; help
people to deal with addictions; and pro-
vide support during life crises. Types of
counselling include genetic counselling,
trauma counselling, and sex therapy. 
In most cases counselling is a one-to-
one activity, but it may also be carried
out in small groups. (See also  child
guidance; family therapy; marriage guid-
ance; psychotherapy.)
cowpox An infection caused by the vac-
cinia virus, which usually affects cows.
This virus was used in the past to confer
immunity against smallpox. 
COX-2 inhibitor drugs A group of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) that cause less stomach irrita-
tion as a side effect than other NSAIDs.
Examples of COX-2 inhibitors include
celecoxib and rofecoxib.
coxa vara A deformity of the  hip in
which the angle between the neck and
head of the femur (thigh-bone) and the
shaft of the femur is reduced, resulting
in shortening of the leg, pain and stiff-
ness in the hip, and a limp. The most
common cause is a fracture to the neck
of the femur or, during adolescence,
injury to the developing part of the head
of the bone. Coxa vara can also occur if
the bone tissue in the neck of the femur
is soft, a condition that may be congen-
ital or the result of a bone disorder such
as  rickets or  Paget＊s disease. Treatment
may include surgery (see osteotomy). 
coxsackievirus One of a group of
viruses responsible for a broad range of
diseases. There are 2 main types of cox-
sackievirus: A and B. The best known of
the type A infections is hand, foot,and
mouth disease, a common childhood
disorder characterized by blistering of the
mouth, hands, and feet. Type B viruses
can cause serious illnesses such as
meningitis, pericarditis, and pneumonia.
crab lice See pubic lice.
CRAB LICE COUGHING UP BLOOD
CThese are the  vestibulocochlear nerve
(hearing and balance),  olfactorynerve
(smell), and  optic nerve  (vision). Other
cranial nerves carry impulses that move
muscles of the head and neck area. These
are the oculomotor, trochlear, and abdu-
cent nerves (movements of the eye),
spinal accessory nerve (head and shoul-
der movements), and hypoglossal nerve
(tongue movements).
Some cranial nerves have both senso-
ry and motor functions. These are the
facial nerve (facial expressions, taste,
and the secretion of saliva and tears)
trigeminal nerve (facial sensation and
jaw movements) and  glossopharyngeal
nerve (taste and swallowing move-
ments). The vagus nerve has branchesto
all the main digestive organs, the heart,
and the lungs, and is a major compo-
nent of the  parasympathetic nervous
system, which is concerned with main-
taining the body＊s automatic functions. 
All but 2 of the cranial nerve pairs con-
nect with nuclei in the  brainstem (the
olfactory and optic nerves link directly
with parts of the cerebrum). The nerves
emerge through openings in the cranium;
many then soon divide into branches. 
crack A popular term for a form of cocaine.
cradle cap A condition common in
babies in which thick, yellow scales oc-
cur in patches over the scalp. It is a form
of  seborrhoeicdermatitis,. which may
also occur on the face, neck, behind the
ears, and in the nappy area.
Cradle cap is harmless as long as the
skin does not become infected. The
condition can be treated by daily use of
a simple shampoo. Alternatively, warm
olive oil or arachis oil may be rubbed
into the baby＊s scalp and left on
overnight in order to loosen and soften
the scales, which can be washed off the
following day. A mild ointment that
contains an  antibiotic drug and a  corti-
costeroid drug may be prescribed if the
skin becomes inflamed.
cramp A painful spasm in a  muscle
caused by excessive and prolonged con-
traction of the muscle fibres. Cramps
often occur as a result of increased
muscular activity, which causes a build-
up of  lactic acid and other chemicals in
the muscles, and small areas of muscle-
fibre damage. Repetitive movements,
such as writing (see  cramp,writer＊s) or
sitting or lying in an awkward position
may also cause cramp. Cramp may fol-
low profuse sweating because loss of
sodium salts disrupts muscle cell activi-
ty. Massaging or stretching the muscles
involved may bring relief. A drug con-
taining calcium or quinine may be given
for recurrent night cramps.
Recurrent, sudden pain in a muscle 
that is not associated with hardness of
the muscle may be caused by peripheral
vascular disease. In this case, the condi-
tion should be investigated and treated
by a doctor.
cramp, writer＊s Painful spasm in the
muscles of the hand caused by repeti-
tive movements, which makes writing or
typing impossible. 
cranial nerves Twelve pairs of  nerves
that emerge directly from the underside
of the  brain. Each of the nerves has a
number as well as a name. The numbers
indicate the sequence in which the
nerves emerge from the brain. 
The main function of some cranial
nerves is to deliver sensory information
from the ears, nose, and eyes to the brain.
150
CRACK CRANIAL NERVES
C
CRANIALNERVES
Facial 
nerve
(7)
Vagus 
nerve
(10)
Trigeminal 
nerve (5)
Vestibulocochlear 
nerve (8)
Glossopharyngeal
(9)and hypoglossal
nerves (12)
Spinal 
accessory 
nerve (11)
BRAIN FROM BELOW
Olfactory
nerve (1)
Oculomotor (3),
trochlear (4), and
abducent nerves (6) 
Optic
nerve (2)craniopharyngioma A rare, non-hor-
mone-secreting tumour of the  pituitary
gland. Symptoms of a craniopharyngi-
oma may include headaches, vomiting,
and defective vision. If a craniopharyn-
gioma develops in childhood, growth
may become stunted and sexual develop-
ment may not occur. Craniopharyngiomas
are usually removed surgically. Untreated,
they may cause permanent brain damage. 
craniosynostosis The premature closure
of one or more of the joints (sutures)
between the curved, flattened bones of
the  skull in infants. If all the joints are
involved, the growing infant＊s brain may
be compressed and there is a risk of brain
damage from pressure inside the skull.
If the abnormality is localized, the head
may be deformed. Craniosynostosis may
occur before birth and, in some cases,
is associated with other birth defects. It
may also occur in an otherwise healthy
baby, or in a baby affected by a disorder
such as  rickets. If the brain is com-
pressed, an operation may be performed
to separate the fused skull bones.
craniotomy The temporary removal of
a section of the skull to perform an
operation on the  brain. A craniotomy
may be used in order to take a sample
of tissue for analysis, remove a tumour,
or drain an abscess or blood clot.
cranium The part of the skull around the
brain. 
C-reactive protein A protein produced
in the body in response to inflammation.
cream A thick, semi-solid preparation
with moisturizing properties used to
apply medications to the skin.
creatinine A waste product produced
by muscles and filtered from the blood by
the kidneys to be excreted in urine.
creatinine clearance See kidney func-
tion tests.
crepitation A crackling sound in the
lungs (heard through a  stethoscope)
caused by abnormal build-up of fluid.
(See also auscultation.)
crepitus A grating sound or sensation
caused by rough surfaces rubbing to-
gether. Crepitus may be felt or heard
when the ends of a broken bone rub
against each other, or when cartilage on
the surfaces of a joint has worn away in
osteoarthritis. Faint crepitus can be heard
151
in the lung as a result of, for example,
inflammation in  pneumonia. Crepitus
also describes the sound made when air
under the skin (see  emphysema, surgi-
cal) or gas gangrene is pressed.
cretinism A  congenital condition char-
acterized by stunted growth and failure
of normal development, and, in infants,
coarse facial features. Cretinism results
when the thyroid gland fails to produce
or produces insufficient amounts of the
thyroid hormone  thyroxine at birth.
Replacement therapy with thyroxine is a
cure, provided the condition is recog-
nized early. (See also hypothyroidism.) 
Creutzfeldt每Jakob disease A rare,
rapidly progressive degenerative condi-
tion of the  brain. Creutzfeldt每Jakob
disease (CJD) is thought to be due to an
infection with a prion (slow virus). This is
similar to the agent that causes scrapie
in sheep and  bovine spongiformen-
cephalopathy (BSE) in cattle. One main
variant of CJD largely affects middle-
aged or elderly people and has no
obvious cause. A second main variant,
occurring in younger people, is associ-
ated with contamination during brain
surgery or transplants from infected
people, or treatment with human growth
hormone or  gonadotrophin hormones.
Recently, a 3rd variant, called new vari-
ant (nv) CJD, that attacks people in their
teens and 20s has been identified.
NvCJD causes pathological changes in
the brain similar to those seen in BSE-
infected cattle. It is thought to be
acquired by eating infected beef.
Symptoms are similar for all variants.
Progressive  dementia and  myoclonus
(sudden muscular contractions) occur;
muscular coordination diminishes; the
intellect and personality deteriorate; and
blindness may develop. As the disease
progresses, speech is lost and the body
becomes rigid. There is no treatment and
death usually occurs within 2每3 years.
cri du chat syndrome A rare, congenital
condition of severe  mental handicap,
abnormal facial appearance, low birth
weight, and short stature, which is
characterized by a cat-like cry in infancy.
The syndrome is caused by a  chromo-
somal abnormality. There is no treatment.
(See also genetic counselling.)
CRI DU CHAT SYNDROME CRANIOPHARYNGIOMA
Ccross-matching A procedure to deter-
mine compatibility between the blood
of a person requiring a blood transfusion
and that of a donor. Red blood cells from
one person are combined with  serum
from the other. Clumping of red blood
cells indicates the presence of antibodies,
showing the blood is not compatible.
croup A common condition in infants
and young children in which narrowing
and inflammation of the airways causes
hoarseness, stridor (a grunting noise
during breathing), and a barking cough.
Croup may be caused by a viral or bac-
terial infection that affects the  larynx,
epiglottis (see  epiglottitis), or  trachea.
Other causes include diphtheria, allergy,
spasm caused by deficient calcium in the
blood, and inhalation of a foreign body. 
Most cases are due to a viral infection
and are mild. 
Humidifying the air can help to make
breathing easier. Nebulized cortico-
steroid drugs (see nebulizer) and oxygen
may be prescribed. Infections are treat-
ed with antibiotic drugs.
crowding, dental See  overcrowding,
dental.
crown, dental An artificial replacement
for the crown of a  tooth that has be-
come decayed, discoloured, or broken.
A porcelain crown is usually used on
front teeth, but back teeth require the
greater strength of a crown made from
gold or porcelain fused to metal. 
A crown may be fitted by filing the nat-
ural tooth to form a peg and cementing
the crown over the top. If the tooth is
152
crisis A term for a turning point in the
course of a disease (either the onset of
recovery or deterioration), or for a dis-
tressing and difficult episode in life.
crisis intervention The provision of
immediate advice or help by a variety of
agencies such as social services depart-
ments to people with acute personal or
sociomedical problems. 
critical A term used to mean seriously ill
or to describe a crucial state of illness
from which a patient may not recover.
Crohn＊s disease A chronic inflamma-
tory disease affecting the gastrointestinal
tract. In young people, Crohn＊s disease
usually affects the ileum, causing spasms
of abdominal pain, diarrhoea, loss of
appetite, anaemia, weight loss, and mal-
absorption. In elderly people, the  rectum
is more often affected, causing rectal
bleeding. In both groups, the disease
may also affect the anus, thecolon and,
rarely, the mouth,  oesophagus, stom-
ach, and duodenum. 
Complications include obstructions in
the intestine; chronic abscesses; inter-
nal  fistulas (abnormal passageways)
between intestinal loops; and external
fistulas from the intestine to the skin of
the abdomin skin or  around the anus.
Complications in other parts of the
body may include inflammation of the
eye, severe  arthritis in various joints,
ankylosing spondylitis, and skin disor-
ders (including eczema).
Investigatory procedures may include
sigmoidoscopy and X-rays using barium
(see barium X-ray examinations). Colon-
oscopy and biopsy may help distinguish
the disease from ulcerative colitis.
Sulfasalazine and related drugs, and
corticosteroid drugs may be prescribed.
A high-vitamin, low-fibre diet may be
beneficial. Acute attacks may require hos-
pitaltreatment, and many patients need
surgery. The symptoms fluctuate over
many years, eventually subsiding in some
patients. If the disease is localized, a
person may remain in normal health. 
crossbite A type of  malocclusion in
which some or all of the lower front
teeth overlap the upper front teeth.
cross-eye A type of strabismus (squint)
in which one or both eyes turns inwards
relative to the other. 
CRISIS CROWN, DENTAL
C
Peg of the
original tooth
Natural tooth
CROWN, DENTAL
Crownwarts, skin tags, some birthmarks, some
skin cancers, and to treat haemorrhoids.
cryotherapy The use of cold or freezing
in treatment. (See also cryosurgery.)
cryptococcosis A rare infection caused
by inhaling the fungus  CRYPTOCOCCUS
NEOFORMANS found especially in soil con-
taminated with pigeon droppings. The
most serious form the infection can take
is meningitis. Another form of infection
causes growths in the lungs, resulting
in chest pain and a cough, or on the
skin, causing a rash of ulcers. Most cases
of cryptococcosis occur in people with re-
duced immunity, such as those with AIDS. 
Cryptococcal meningitis is diagnosed
from a sample of spinal fluid. A combi-
nation of  amphotericin B and another
antifungal drug,  flucytosine, is usually
prescribed. Most cases in which only the
lungs are infected need no treatment. 
cryptorchidism A developmental dis-
order of male infants in which the
testes fail to descend normally into the
scrotum (see testis, undescended).
cryptosporidiosis A type of diarrhoeal
infection caused by protozoa, which may
be spread from person to person or from
domestic animals to people. The disease
causes watery diarrhoea and sometimes
fever and abdominal pain. It is most com-
mon in children but also occurs in male
homosexuals. Treatment, apart from re-
hydration therapy, is not usually needed
except for people whose immune system
is suppressed, in whom the infection may
be much more severe.
CT scanning A diagnostic technique in
which the combined use of a computer
and X-rays passed through the body at 
different angles produces cross-sectional
images of tissues. CT (computed tomo-
graphy) scanning has revolutionized the
diagnosis and treatment of tumours, ab-
scesses, and haemorrhages in the brain,
as well as head injuries and  strokes. CT
scanning is also used to locate and image
tumours, investigate diseases, and aid
needle biopsy in organs of the trunk.
Newer types of CT scanners use a spi-
ral technique: the scanner rotates around
the bodyas the patient is moved slowly
forwards on a bed, causing the X-ray
beamsto  follow a spiral course. The
computer produces 3-D images. Injected
153
badly decayed or weakened, it may be
necessary to remove the entire natural
crown of the tooth and then fit the arti-
ficial crown onto a post cemented in
the root canal.
cruciate ligaments Two ligaments in the
knee that pass over each other to form a
cross. The ligaments form connections
between the  femur and  tibia inside the
knee joint and prevent overbending and
overstraightening at the knee.  
crush syndrome Damage to a large
amount of body  muscle (usually as a
result of a serious accident) causing kid-
ney failure. The damaged muscles release
proteins into the bloodstream, temporar-
ilyimpairing kidney function. Dialysis is
given while the kidneys recover. 
crutch palsy Weakness or  paralysis of
muscles in the wrist, fingers, and thumb
due to pressure on the nerves that sup-
ply these muscles from a crutch pressing
under the arm. The condition does not
occurin people who use the more com-
mon elbow crutches. 
crying in infants A normal response in
babies to needs or discomforts, such as
hunger or thirst. Most healthy babies stop
crying when their needs are attended to.
In a few cases, persistent crying may be
due to a physical cause such as intoler-
ance of cow＊s milk or an illness (such as
an ear or throat infection, or a viral fever).
cryo- A prefix meaning ice cold, used
medically to indicate that a procedure
uses freezing or low temperatures.
cryopreservation The preservation of
living cells by freezing. The technique is
used to store human eggs for  in vitro
fertilization, sperm for  artificial insem-
ination, or plasma and blood belonging
to rare blood groups. 
cryosurgery The use of temperatures
below freezing to destroy tissue, or the
use of cold during surgery to produce
adhesion between an instrument and
body tissue. Cryosurgery causes only
minimal scarring and is used to treat
cancerous tumours in sites where heavy
scarring can block vital openings such
as in the  cervix, the liver, and the
intestines. It may be used in eye opera-
tions, for example in  cataract surgery
and treatment for retinal detachment. It
is also commonly used forremoving
CT SCANNING CRUCIATE LIGAMENTS
Ccure To restore to normal health after an
illness. The term usually means the dis-
appearance of a disease rather than a halt
in its progress. Medication or therapy that
ends an illness may also be termed a cure.
curettage The use of a sharp-edged,
spoon-shaped surgical instrument called
a  curette to scrape abnormal tissue, or
tissue for analysis, from the lining of a
body cavity or from the skin. 
curettage, dental The scraping of the
wall of a cavity or other surface with a
dental  curette. Dental curettage is one
method used to remove the lining of
periodontal pockets and diseased tis-
sue from root surfaces in periodontitis.
curette A spoon-shaped surgical instru-
ment for scraping away material or
tissue from an organ, cavity, or surface.
Curling＊s ulcer A type of  stress ulcer
that occurs specifically in people who
have suffered extensive skin burns. 
Cushing＊s syndrome A hormonal dis-
order caused by an abnormally high
level of  corticosteroid hormones in the
blood. Cushing＊s syndrome is character-
ized by a red moon-shaped face, wasting
of the limbs, thickening of the trunk, and
a humped upper back. Other symptoms
154
or swallowed contrast media (chemicals
opaqueto X-rays) may be used to make
certain tissues more visible. 
culture A growth of bacteria or other
microorganisms, cells, or tissues culti-
vated artificially in the laboratory.
Microorganisms are collected from the
site of an infection and cultured to pro-
duce adequate amounts so that tests to
identy them can be performed. Cells may
be cultured to diagnose disorderspre-
natally and for study of chromosomes
(see  chromosome analysis). Some tis-
sues, such as skin, may be cultured to
produce larger amounts for grafting. 
cupping An ancient form of treatment,
still used in folk healing in some coun-
tries, which draws blood to the surface
by applying a small heated vessel to the
skin. The inflammatory response pro-
duced is believed to help in bronchitis,
asthma, and musculoskeletal pains. 
curare An extract from the bark and
juices of various trees that has been
used for centuries by South American
Indians as an arrow poison. Curare kills
by causing muscle  paralysis. Synthetic
compounds related to curare are used to
produce paralysis during surgery.
CULTURE CUSHING＊S SYNDROME
C
Control
panel
Motorized bed
moves forwards
after each scan
X-ray detector
rotates to remain
opposite X-ray
source
X-ray beam
CTSCANNING
CTscanner tilts forwards
and backwards
X-ray source
generates a beam
of X-rays and
rotates around
body
Direction of
rotation of
X-ray sourceinclude acne, stretch marks, bruising,
weakening of the bones by osteoporosis,
susceptibility to infection and  peptic
ulcers, and, in women, increased hairi-
ness. Mental changes frequently occur,
causing depression,  insomnia,  paranoia,
or, euphoria. Hypertension, oedema, and
diabetes mellitus may develop. In children,
growth may be suppressed. 
The excess hormones are mostcom-
monly due to prolonged treatment with
corticosteroid drugs. Such cases of
Cushing＊s syndrome are usually mild. In
other cases, high hormone levels are
due to overactivity of the adrenal glands
as a result of an adrenal tumour, or of a
pituitary tumour affecting production of
ACTH (adrenocortocotrophic hormone),
which stimulates the adrenal glands. 
Cushing＊s syndrome caused by cortico-
steroid drugs usually disappears if the
dose is gradually reduced. A tumour of
an adrenal gland is removed surgically. A
pituitary tumour may be removed surgi-
cally or shrunk by irradiation and drug
treatment. In both cases, surgery is fol-
lowed by hormone replacement therapy.
cusp, dental A protrusion on the grind-
ing surface of a tooth.
cutaneous Relating to the skin. 
cutdown Creation of a small skin inci-
sionin order to gain access to a vein to
take blood or to give intravenous fluid.
This is sometimes needed when a vein
cannot be identified through the skin in
conditions such as shock.
cuticle The outermost layer of skin. The
term commonly refers to the thin flap of
skin at the base of a nail; and also to
the outer layer of a hair shaft.
155
CVS The abbreviation for chorionic villus
sampling and for cardiovascular system.
cyanide Any of a group of salts of hydro-
cyanic acid. Most are highly poisonous;
inhalation or ingestion can  rapidly lead
tobreathlessness, paralysis, and death.
cyanocobalamin An alternative name
for vitamin B12.
cyanosis A bluish coloration of the skin
or mucous membranes due to too much
deoxygenated haemoglobin in the blood.
Cyanosis confined to the hands and feet
is not serious and is usually due to slow
blood flow, often as a result of exposure
to cold. A blue tinge to the lips and
tongue, however, could be due to a heart
or lung disorder such as chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease or heart failure.
cyclopenthiazide A thiazidediuretic drug
used to reduce oedema associated with
heart failure, kidney disorders,  cirrhosis
of the liver, and premenstrual syndrome,
and to treat  hypertension. Side effects
include lethargy, loss of appetite, leg
cramps, dizziness, rash, and impotence. 
cyclophosphamide An anticancer drug
used in the treatment of Hodgkin＊s dis-
ease and leukaemia. It is also used as an
immunosuppressant drug and occasion-
ally to treat connective tissue diseases
such as systemic lupus erythematosus.
cycloplegia Paralysis of the ciliary mus-
cle of the eye impeding accommodation.
Cycloplegia may be induced by cyclople-
gic drugs to facilitate eye examinations. 
cyclosporin An alternative spelling for
ciclosporin.
cyclothymia A personality characteris-
tic typified by marked changes of mood
from cheerful, energetic, and sociable to
gloomy, listless, and withdrawn. Mood
swings may last for days or months and
may follow a regular pattern. 
cyproterone acetate A drug that blocks
the action of androgenhormones and is
used in the treatment of cancer of the
prostate (see prostate, cancer of) and oc-
casionally to reduce male sex drive. Side
effects include weight gain and an in-
creased risk of developing of blood clots.
cyst An abnormal and usually harmless
lump or swelling, filled with fluid or
semi-solid material. Cysts occur in body
organs or tissue. Types of cysts include
sebaceous cysts,  dermoid cysts,ovarian
CYST CUSP, DENTAL
C
Free
edge
Nail matrix
Bone
Skin
CROSSSECTION OF FINGERTIP
Nail plate
CUTICLE
Nail
bed
Cuticle156
is becoming a possibility. Amniocentesis
can determine whether ornot a fetus is
affected, or, alternatively, newborn babies
can be screened for the disease; early
diagnosis and treatment improves the
long-term prognosis.
cystitis Inflammation of the bladder lin-
ing, usually due to a bacterial infection.
The main symptoms are a frequent urge
to pass urine and burning pain on uri-
nating. Urine may be foul-smelling or
contain blood. There may be fever and
chills, and lower abdominal discomfort.
Cystitis is common in women because
the urethra is short, making it easier for
bacteria to pass into the bladder. A
bladder calculus (stone), a bladder tumour,
or a urethral stricture can obstruct urine
flow and increase the risk of infection.
In men, cystitis is rare; it usually occurs
when an obstruction, such as anen-
slarged prostate gland (see  prostate,
enlarged), compresses the urethra. Cys-
titis is children is often associated with
a structural abnormality of the ureters,
which allows  reflux  (backward flow) of
urine. The use of catheters (see catheter-
ization, urinary) also carries the risk of
infection. Diabetics are especially sus-
ceptible to urinary tract infections.
Symptoms of mild cystitis may be re-
lieved by drinking 1 pint (
1
? 2 liter) of fluid
every 4 hours. Any infection is treated
with antibiotic drugs.
cystocele A swelling in the vagina  that
is formed where the  bladder pushes
against weakened tissues in the vaginal
wall. Cystocele may be associated with
a prolapsed uterus (see uterus, prolapse
of). If the urethra is pulled out of posi-
tion by a cystocele, it may cause stress
incontinence or incomplete emptying of
the bladder, leading to infection of the
retained urine (see  cystitis).  Pelvic floor
exercises may relieve symptoms.Surgery
may be used to lift and tighten the tis-
sues at the front of the vagina. 
cystometry A procedure used to assess
bladder function and to detect abnor-
malities of the  nerves supplying the
bladder or bladder muscle. Cystometry
is used to investigate urinary incontinence
or poor bladder emptying caused by
damage to bladder muscles or disrupt-
ed nerve control of these muscles.
CYST-/CYSTO- CYSTOMETRY
C
cysts, breast cysts, Baker＊s cysts, and cysts
that form around parasites in diseases
such as hydatid disease or amoebiasis.
Cysts may need to be removed surgical-
ly if they disrupt the function of tissues.
cyst-/cysto- Relating to the bladder, as
in cystitis (inflammation of the bladder).
cystectomy Surgical removal of the blad-
der, used for treating bladder cancer (see
bladder tumours). It is followed by con-
struction of an alternative channel for
urine, usually ending in a  stoma in the
lower abdomen (see urinary diversion).
In men, the  prostate gland and  seminal
vesicles are also removed, usually result-
ingin  impotence. In women, the uterus,
ovaries, and fallopian tubes are removed.
After cystectomy an external pouch is
worn for the collection of urine. 
cysticercosis An infection, rare in devel-
oped countries, characterized by the
presence of cysts in muscles and in the
brain that are formed by the larval stage
of the pork tapeworm.
cystic fibrosis A genetic disorder, char-
acterized by a tendency to develop
chronic lung infections and an inability
to absorb fats and other nutrients from
food. The main feature of cystic fibrosis
(CF) is secretion of sticky mucus, which
is unable to flow freely, in the nose,
throat, airways, and intestines. 
The course and severity of the disease
vary. Typically, a child passes unformed,
pale, oily, foul-smelling  faeces and may
fail to thrive. Often, growth is stunted
and the child has recurrent respiratory
infections. Without prompt treatment,
pneumonia,  bronchitis,  and  bronchiect-
asis may develop, causing lung damage.
Most male sufferers and some females
are infertile. CF causes excessive loss of
salt in sweat, and  heatstroke and col-
lapse may occur in hot weather. 
Prompt treatment with intensive physio-
therapy and antibiotics helps to minimize
lung damage from chest infections.
Pancreatin and a diet rich in proteins
and calories are given to bring about
weight gain and more normal faeces.
However, despite treatment, most people
with CF suffer permanent lung damage
and have a reduced life expectancy. Lung
or heart每lung transplants have produced
good results, and specific gene therapycystoscopy  The examination of the  ur-
ethra and  bladder using a cystoscope
inserted up the urethra. A cystoscope  is
a rigid metal or flexible fibre-optic view-
ing instrument, sometimes with a camera
at the tip (see endoscopy). Cystoscopy is
used to inspect the bladder for  calculi,
bladder tumours, and sites of bleeding
and infection, and to obtain urine sam-
ples from the ureters to look for infection
or tumourcells. Radiopaque dye may be
injected into the ureters via the cysto-
scope during the X-ray procedure of
retrograde pyelography (see urography).
Treatment, including removal of blad-
der tumours or calculi and insertion of
stents (narrow tubes) into a ureter to
relieve an obstruction, can all be per-
formed via the cystoscope.
cystostomy The surgical creation of a
hole in the  bladder usually performed
to drain urine when the introduction of
a catheter is inadvisable or impossible. 
cystourethrography, micturating An
X-ray procedure for studying the bladder
while urine is passed. Micturating cysto-
urethrography is most commonly used
in young children to detect abnormal
reflux of urine as the bladder empties.
-cyte A suffix that denotes a cell. For ex-
ample, a leukocyte is a white blood cell.
cyto-  A prefix that means related to a
cell, as in cytology, the study of cells.
cytokine A protein released by body
cells in response to the presence of dis-
ease-causing organisms such as viruses.
Cytokines (which include  interferons)
bind to other cells, activating the im-
mune response (see immune system).
cytology The study of individual cells.
Cytology＊s main use in medicine is to
detect abnormal cells. It is widely used
to screen for cancer (as in the  cervical
smear test) or to confirm a diagnosis of
cancer, and increasingly in antenatal
screening for certain fetal abnormalities
(using  amniocentesis or  chorionic villus
sampling to obtain the sample of cells).
Examination of cells in a sample of
fluid also helps to determine the cause
of conditions such as  pleural effusion
and ascites. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy
of internal organs also involves cytology.
cytomegalovirus One of the most com-
mon herpes viruses, which causes infected
cells to take on an enlarged appearance.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection may
cause an illness resembling  infectious
mononucleosis, but usually produces no
symptoms. People who have impaired
immunity are more seriously infected. A
pregnant woman can transmit the virus
to her unborn child; this can cause birth
defects and brain damage in the child.
cytopathology The study of the micro-
scopic appearances of  cells in health
and disease. (See also cytology.)
cytotoxic drugs A group of drugs that
kill or damage abnormal cells; a type of
anticancer drug. Cytotoxic drugs may
also damage or kill healthy cells, espe-
cially those that are multiplying rapidly.
CYSTOSCOPY
157
CYTOTOXIC DRUGS CYSTOSCOPY
C Monitor
Fluid to irrigate
bladder
Urethra
Bladder
Cystoscope
Illuminated
area
ROUTE OF CYSTOSCOPE
Surgeon
Flexible
cystoscopeD
158
dacryocystitis Inflammation of the tear
sac, usually resulting from blockage of
the tear duct. The condition may occur
in infants if the tear duct has not devel-
oped normally. In adults, it may follow
inflammation in the nose or an injury.
The cause is often unknown.
Symptoms include pain, redness, and
swelling between the inner corner of
the eyelids and the nose. Infection may
occur and cause a discharge. The obs-
truction may be cleared by flushing the
tear duct with saline. Antibiotic eye-drops
or ointment are given for infection. In
infants, massaging the tear sac may
clear a blockage. Surgery to drain the
tear sac (called dacryocystorhinostomy)
is occasionally necessary.
dactylitis Inflammation of the fingers or
toes, which sometimes occurs in people
with  sickle cell anaemia.  More rarely,
dactylitis can be caused by  tuberculosis
and syphilis.
danazol A drug used for treating endo-
metriosis, noncancerous breast disease,
and  menorrhagia. Danazol suppresses
the release of gonadotrophin hormones,
which in turn reduces the production of
the hormone oestrogen. This action
usually prevents ovulation and causes
irregularity or absence of menstrual
periods. Possible side effects include
nausea, rash, and weight gain. Pregnancy
should be avoided while taking danazol. 
D and C An abbreviation for dilatation
and curettage, a gynaecological proce-
dure in which the  cervix is dilated and
the endometrium is scraped away and a
sample removed for analysis. D and C
was once used to diagnose and treat
disorders of the  uterus. It has largely
been replaced by hysteroscopy, an
endoscopic technique for removing the
endometrium (see endometrial ablation).
dander Minute scales that are shed
from an animal＊s skin, hair, or feathers.
Some people are allergic to dander and
develop the symptoms of allergic rhini-
tis or asthma if they inhale the scales.
dandruff A harmless condition in which
dead skin is shed from the scalp, often
producing white flakes. The usual cause
is the rash seborrhoeic  dermatitis. Fre-
quent use of an antidandruff shampoo
usually controls the dandruff. 
dantrolene A muscle-relaxant drug used
to relieve muscle spasm caused by
spinal injury, stroke, or neurological dis-
orders such as cerebral palsy. The drug
does not cure the underlying disorder,
but often improves mobility.
dantron A  laxative drug used to treat
constipation in the terminally ill who
are often constipated as a side effect of
opioid  analgesic drugs. Dantron may
colour the urine red.
dapsone An  antibacterial drug used to
treat  Hansen＊sdisease (leprosy) and
dermatitis herpetiformis. Combined with
pyrimethamine, dapsone is also used 
to prevent malaria. Dapsone may cause
nausea, vomiting, and, rarely, damage
to the liver, red blood cells, and nerves.
daydreaming Conjuring up pleasant or
exciting images or situations in one＊s
mind during waking hours.
day surgery Surgical treatment carried
out in a hospital or clinic without an
overnight stay. The proportion of all
operations performed on a day-surgery
basis has risen substantially in recent
years. Modern anaesthetics and surgical
methods, such as minimally invasive sur-
gery, allow a swifter recovery than in the
past, and patients can usually return
home within a few hours.
DDT The abbreviation for the insecti-
cide dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane. DDT
was once widely used in the fight against
diseases that are transmitted by insects,
particularly in hot climates. However,
some insects have developed resistance,
which can be passed on to offspring.
(See also pesticides.)
deafness Complete or partial loss of
hearing in 1 or both ears. There are 2
types of deafness: conductive deafness,
which results from faulty propagation of
sound from the outer to the inner ear;
and sensorineural deafness, in which
there is a failure in transmission of
DACRYOCYSTITIS DEAFNESS
D159
sounds to the brain. Hearing tests can
determine whether deafness is conduc-
tive or sensorineural. 
The most common cause of conductive
deafness in adults is earwax. Otosclerosis
is a less common cause and is usually
treated by an operation called stapedec-
tomy, in which the stapes (a small bone
in the middle ear) is replaced with an
artificial substitute. In a child, conductive
deafness usually resultsfrom otitis media
or glue ear. This condition may be treated
by surgery (see myringotomy). In rare
cases, deafness results from a perfor-
ated eardrum (see eardrum, perforated).
Sensorineural deafness may be pre-
sent from birth. This type of deafness
may result from a birth injury or damage
resulting from maternal infection with
rubella at an early stage of pregnancy.
Inner-ear damage may also occur soon
after birth as the result of severe  jaun-
dice. Deafness at birth is incurable.
Many children who are born deaf can
learn to communicate effectively, often
by using sign language.  Cochlear im-
plants may help those children born
profoundly deaf to learn speech.
In later life, sensorineural deafness can
be due to damage to the cochlea and/or
labyrinth. It may result from prolonged
exposure to loud noise, to  M谷ni豕re＊s
disease, to certain drugs, or to some viral
infections. The cochlea and labyrinth
also degenerate naturally with old age,
resulting in presbyacusis. Sensorineural
deafness due to damage to the acoustic
nerve may be the result of an  acoustic
neuroma. Deafness may be accompan-
ied by tinnitus and vertigo. Sometimes it
can lead to depression.
People with sensorineural deafness
usually need  hearing-aids to increase
the volume of sound reaching the inner
ear.  Lip-reading is invaluable for deaf
people. Other aids, such as an amplifier
for the earpiece of a telephone, are
available. (See also ear; hearing.)
death Permanent cessation of all vital
functions. The classic indicators of death
are the permanent cessation of heart
and lung function, and, in almost all
cases, these remain the criteria by
which death is certified. Brain death is
the irreversible cessation of all functions
of the entire brain, including the brain-
stem. The diagnosis of death under
normal circumstances, when the indivi-
dual is not on a ventilator, is based on
the absence of breathing, absence of
heartbeat, and on the pupils being fixed
wide open and unresponsive to light.
When an individual is on a ventilator,
the criteria for diagnosing brain death
are based on clear evidence of irre-
versible damage to the brain; persistent
deep coma; no attempts at breathing
when the patient is taken off the venti-
lator; and lack of brainstem function.
(See also death, sudden; mortality.)
death rate See mortality.
death, sudden Unexpected death in a
person who previously seemed to be
healthy. The most common cause in
adults is cardiac arrest. Cardiomyopathy
may cause sudden death at any age,
and its presence may have been unsus-
pected. Sudden death may also occur
as a result of  stroke or in people with
unsuspected myocarditis, or pneumonia.
Less common causes of a sudden death
include  anaphylactic shock, a severe
attack of asthma, and suicide.
In infants, death without warning is
called  sudden infant death syndrome
(SIDS) or cot death. Cases of sudden
death at any age must be reported to
the coroner, who decides whether there
should be an autopsy.
death, sudden infant See sudden infant
death syndrome (SIDS). 
debility Generalized weakness and lack
of energy. It may be due to a physical
disorder (such as anaemia) or a psycho-
logical disorder (such as depression).
debridement Surgical removal of for-
eign material and/or dead, damaged, or
infected tissue from a wound or burn in
order to expose healthy tissue. Such
treatment promotes the healthy healing
of badly damaged skin, muscle, and
other tissues in the body.
decalcification, dental The dissolving
of minerals in a tooth. Dental decalcifi-
cation is the first stage of tooth decay. It
is caused by the bacteria in plaque act-
ing on refined carbohydrates (mainly
sugar) in food to produce acid, which
leads to changes on the surface of the
tooth. If the decalcification penetrates
DECALCIFICATION, DENTAL DEATH
D160
the enamel, it spreads into the dentine
and permits bacteria to enter the pulp.
(See also caries, dental.)
decay, dental See caries, dental.
decerebrate The state of being without
a functioning  cerebrum, the main con-
trolling part of the brain. It occurs if the
brainstem is severed, which effectively
isolates the cerebrum. 
deciduous teeth See primary teeth.
decompression sickness A hazard of
divers and of others who work in or
breathe compressed air or other gas
mixtures. Decompression sickness is
also called ※the bends§, and it results
from gas bubbles forming in the tissues
and impeding the flow of blood. At
depth, divers accumulate inert gas in
their tissues from the high-pressure gas
mixture that they breathe (see  scuba-
diving medicine). Problems can usually
be avoided by allowing the excess gas
in their tissues to escape slowly into
the lungs during controlled, slow ascent
or release of pressure. If ascent is too
rapid and pressure falls too quickly, gas
can no longer be held within a tissue.
Resulting bubbles may block blood ves-
sels, causing symptoms such as skin
itching and mottling and severe pain in
and around the larger joints. Symptoms
of nervous system impairment (such as
leg weakness or visual disturbances) are
particularly serious, as is a painful, tight
feeling across the chest.
Divers with decompression sickness
are immediately placed inside a recom-
pression chamber. Pressure within the
chamber is raised, causing the bubbles
within the tissues to redissolve. Subse-
quently, the pressure in the chamber is
slowly reduced, allowing the excess gas
to escape safely via the lungs. If treated
promptly, most divers with the ※bends§
make a full recovery. In serious, untreated
cases, there may be long-term prob-
lems, such as paralysis. 
decompression, spinal canal Surgery
to relieve pressure on the spinal cord or
a nerve root emerging from it (see micro-
discectomy). Pressure may have various
causes, including a  disc prolapse, a
tumour or abscess of the spinal cord, or
a tumour, abscess or fracture of the verte-
brae. Any of these conditions can cause
weakness or paralysis of the limbs and
loss of bladder control.
To treat major disc prolapses and
tumours, a laminectomy (removal of the
bony arches of 1 or more vertebrae) to
expose the affected part of the cord or
nerve roots may be performed. Recovery
after treatment depends on the severity
and duration of the pressure, the success
of the surgery in relieving the pressure,
and whether any damage is sustained
by the nerves during the operation. 
decongestant drugs  Drugs that are
used to relieve  nasal congestion com-
monly in people with upper respiratory
tract infections. They work by narrowing
blood vessels in the membranes lining
the nose. This action reduces swelling,
inflammation, and the amount of mucus
produced by the lining. Common drugs
include ephedrine, oxymetazoline, and
phenylephrine. Small amounts of these
drugs are present in many over-the-
counter cold remedies. Taken by mouth,
decongestant drugs may cause tremor
and palpitations. Adverse effects are
unlikely with nose drops, but if taken for
several days they become ineffective
and symptoms may then recur or wors-
en despite continued treatment.
decubitus ulcer See bedsores.
deep vein thrombosis See  thrombo-
sis, deep vein.
defaecation The expulsion of faeces
from the body via the anus. 
defence mechanisms Techniques used
by the mind to cope with unpleasant or
unwelcome emotions, impulses, experi-
ences, or events. Repression of emotions
surrounding a particular event or refus-
ing to accept an event (denial) are both
defence mechanisms.
defibrillation Administration of one or
more brief electric shocks to the heart,
usuallyvia 2 metal plates, or paddles,
placed on the chest over the heart. It is
performed to return a heart＊s rhythm to
normal in some types of  arrhythmia
(irregular or rapid heartbeat), such as
atrial fibrillation or  ventricular fibrilla-
tion. Defibrillation can be carried out as
an emergency procedure to treat ven-
tricular fibrillation, which is a cause of
cardiac arrest and most commonly occurs
after a heart attack (see  myocardial
DECAY, DENTAL DEFIBRILLATION
D161
infarction). It can also be used as a
planned treatment, in which case it is
performed under a brief general anaes-
thesia. Breathing may be maintained
artificially during the procedure.
defoliant poisoning The toxic effects of
plant poisons that cause leaves to drop
off. Defoliants are poisonous if swal-
lowed. Widely used defoliants include
sodium  chlorate, potassium chlorate,
phenoxy herbicides, and paraquat. 
deformity Any malformation or distor-
tion of part of the body. Deformities
may be congenital (present from birth),
or they may be acquired as a result of
injury, disorder, or disuse. Most congen-
ital deformities are relatively rare. Among
the more common are club-foot (talipes)
and cleft lip and palate. Injuries that can
cause deformity include burns, torn mus-
cles, and broken bones. Disorders that
may cause deformity include nerve prob-
lems, some deficiencies, such as rickets,
and Paget＊s disease of the bone. Disuse of
a part of the body can lead to deformity
through stiffening and  contracture of
unused muscles or tendons. Many defor-
mities can be corrected by orthopaedic
techniques, plastic surgery, or exercise. 
degeneration Physical and/or chemical
changes in cells, tissues, or organs that
reduce their efficiency. It is a feature of
aging and may also be due to a disease
process. Other known causes include
injury, reduced blood supply, poisoning
(by alcohol, for example), or a diet defi-
cient in a specific vitamin. (See also
degenerative disorders.)
degenerative disorders A term cover-
ing a range of conditions in which there
is progressive impairment of the struc-
ture and function of part of the body.
The definition excludes conditions due
to inflammation, infection, altered im-
mune responses, chemical or physical
damage, or cancerous change. 
The number of specialized cells or
structures in the organ affected is usu-
ally reduced, and cells are replaced by
connective tissue or scar tissue. 
Degenerative nervous system disor-
ders include Alzheimer＊s disease, motor
neuron disease, Huntington＊s disease,
and  Parkinson＊s disease. Degenerative
DEGENERATIVE DISORDERS DEFOLIANT POISONING
D
Defibrillator delivers
electric shock and
senses heart beat
Saline
drip
Breathing bag to inflate
lungs with oxygen
Paddle
placed
on chest
Heart
trace
Blood-pressure cuff
DEFIBRILLATION
Jelly pad to
protect skin162
disorders of the eye include Leber＊s
optic atrophy and senile macular degen-
eration. Degenerative disorders of the
joints include osteoarthritis.
Some hardening of the arteries seems
to be a feature of aging. In some peo-
ple, degenerative changes in the muscle
coat of arteries are unusually severe
and calcium deposits may be seen on
X-rays (as in Monckeberg＊s sclerosis, a
type of arteriosclerosis). Several degener-
ative disorders, such as the  muscular
dystrophies, are now known to be genetic.
dehiscence The splitting open of a partly
healed wound.
dehydration A condition in which a per-
son＊s water content is at a dangerously
low level. Water accounts for about 60
per cent of a man＊s weight and 50 per
cent of a woman＊s. The total water (and
mineral salts and other substances dis-
solved in the body＊s fluids) content must
be kept within fairly narrow limits for
healthy functioning of cells and tissues.
Dehydration occurs due to inadequate
intake of fluids or excessive fluid loss.
The latter may occur with severe or pro-
longed vomiting or diarrhoea or with
uncontrolled  diabetes mellitus,  diabetes
insipidus, and some types of kidney fail-
ure. Children are especially susceptible
to dehydration by diarrhoea.
Severe dehydration causes extreme
thirst, dry lips and tongue, an increase
in heart rate and breathing rate, dizzi-
ness, confusion, lethargy, and eventual
coma. The skin looks dry and loses its
elasticity. Any urine passed is small in
quantity and dark-coloured. If there is
also salt depletion, there may also be
headaches, cramps, and pallor. 
Bottled mineral water can help main-
tain the intake of salts. For vomiting
and diarrhoea,  rehydration therapy is
needed; salt and glucose rehydration
mixtures are available from chemists. 
In severe cases of dehydration, fluids
are given intravenously. The water/salt
balance is carefully monitored by blood
tests and adjusted if necessary.
d谷j角 vu French for ※already seen§. A
sense of having already experienced an
event that is happening at the moment.
Frequent occurrence may sometimes be
a symptom of temporal lobe epilepsy.
Delhi belly Another name for gastroen-
teritis and infective diarrhoea caused by
ingesting contaminated food or water.
delinquency Behaviour in a young per-
son that would be considered a crime in
an adult. The term is often extended to
include noncriminal behaviour such as
drug abuse,  playing truant, or running
away from home. Juvenile delinquency
probably results from a combination 
of social, psychological, and biological
factors. Child guidance or family therapy
may be recommended. Persistent offen-
ders may be sent to special schools,
taken into care, or made wards of court.
delirium A state of acute mental confu-
sion, commonly brought on by physical
illness. Symptoms vary according to
personality, environment, and the seve-
rityof  illness. They may include failure
to understand events or remember what
has been happening, physical restless-
ness, mood swings, hallucinations, and
terrified panic. High fever and distur-
bances of body chemistry are commonly
present. Children and older people are
most susceptible to delirium, particularly
during infection, after surgery, or when
there is a pre-existing brain disturbance
such as  dementia. Drugs, poisons, and
alcohol are common precipitants. 
delirium tremens A state of confusion
accompanied by trembling and vivid hal-
lucinations. It usually arises in alcoholics
after withdrawal or abstinence from alco-
hol. Early symptoms include restlessness,
agitation, trembling, and sleeplessness.
The person may develop a rapid heart-
beat, fever, and dilation of the pupils.
Sweating, confusion, hallucinations, and
convulsions may also occur. Treatment
consists of rest, rehydration, and sedation.
Vitamin injections, particularly of thiamine
(see vitamin B complex), may be given.
delivery The expulsion or extraction of
a baby from the mother＊s uterus. In
most cases, the baby lies lengthwise 
in the uterus with its head facing down-
wards and is delivered head first
through the vaginal opening by a com-
bination of uterine contractions and
maternal effort (see  childbirth). If the
baby is lying in an abnormal position
(see breechdelivery; malpresentation), if
uterine contractions are weak, or if the
DEHISCENCE DELIVERY
D163
baby＊s head is large in relation to the
size of the mother＊s pelvis, a  forceps
delivery or  vacuum extraction  may be
required. If a vaginal delivery is impos-
sible or dangerous to the mother or the
baby, a caesarean section is necessary. 
deltoid The triangular muscle of the
shoulder region that forms the rounded
flesh of the outer part of the upper arm,
and passes up and over the shoulder
joint. The wide end of the muscle is
attached to the shoulderblade and the
collarbone. The muscle fibres meet to
form the apex of the triangle, which is
attached to the humerus (upper-arm
bone) halfway down its length. The cen-
tral, strongest part of the muscle raises
the arm sideways. The front and back
parts of the muscle twist the arm.
delusion A fixed, irrational idea not
shared by others and not responding to
reasoned argument. The idea in a para-
noid delusion involves persecution or
jealousy. For instance, a person may
falsely believe that he or she is being
poisoned (see paranoia). Persistent del-
usions are a sign of serious mental
illness, most notably schizophrenia and
manic每depressive illness. (See also  hal-
lucination; illusion.)
dementia A condition characterised by
a deterioration in brain function. Demen-
tia is almost always due to Alzheimer＊s
disease  or to cerebrovascular disease,
including strokes. Cerebrovascular dis-
ease is often due to narrowed or blocked
arteries in the brain.  Recurrent loss of
blood supply to the brain usuallyresults
in deterioration that occurs gradually
but in stages. A small proportion of
cases of dementia in people younger
than 65 have a underlying treatable
cause such as head injury, brain tumour,
encephalitis, or alcoholdependence.
The main symptoms of dementia are
progressive memory loss, disorienta-
tion, and confusion. Sudden outbursts
or embarrassing behaviour may be the
first signs of the condition. Unpleasant
personality traits may be magnified;
families may have to endure accusa-
tions, unreasonable demands, or even
assault. Paranoia, depression, and delu-
sions may occur as the disease worsens.
Irritability or anxiety gives way to indif-
ference towards all feelings. Personal
habits deteriorate, and speech becomes
incoherent. Affected people may even-
tually need total nursing care.
Management of the most common
Alzheimer-type illness is based on the
treatment of symptoms. Sedativedrugs
may be given for restlessness or para-
noia.Drugs for dementia, for example
donepezil, can slow mental decline in
some people with mild to moderate
Alzheimer＊s disease (see  acetylcholines-
terase inhibitors).
dementia praecox An outdated term
for severe schizophrenia, especially that
affecting adolescents or young adults. 
De Morgan＊s spots Harmless red or
purple raised spots in the skin, consist-
ing of a cluster of minute blood vessels.
About 2mm across, the spots usually
affect middle-aged or older people.
With increasing age, the spots become
more numerous but do not increase in
size. They may bleed if injured. Treat-
ment is unnecessary.
demyelination Breakdown of the fatty
sheaths that surround and electrically
insulate nerve fibres. The sheaths pro-
vide nutrients to the nerve fibres and
are vital to the passage of electrical
impulses along them. Demyelination
※short-circuits§ the functioning of the
nerve, causing loss of sensation, coordi-
nation, and power in specific areas of the
body. The affected nerves may be within
DEMYELINATION DELTOID
D
DELTOID
Trapezius
Shoulderblade
Deltoid
Triceps
of arm
BACKVIEW164
the  central nervous system  (CNS) or be
part of the peripheral nervous system.
Patches of demyelination are visible
on MRI of the brain in multiple sclerosis.
The cause of the demyelination is not
known. In many cases, demyelination
attacks alternate with periods of partial
or complete recovery of nerve function.
In encephalomyelitis, there is inflamma-
tion of nerve cells within the CNS and
sometimes areas of demyelination. 
dendritic ulcer A type of corneal ulcer
commonly caused by infection with her-
pes simplex virus. 
dengue A tropical disease caused by a
virus spread by the mosquito  AEDES
AEGYPTI. Symptoms include fever, head-
ache, rash, and joint and muscle pains,
which often subside after about 3 days.
There is no specific treatment for dengue.
Prevention involves protection against
mosquito bites (see insect bites).
densitometry An imaging technique that
uses low-dose  X-rays to measure bone
density, as determined by the concen-
tration of calcified material. It is used to
diagnose and assess the severity of
osteoporosis, especially in the spine and
femur, and to assess its response to
treatment. During the procedure, X-rays
are passed through the body. A computer
assesses the amount of X-rays absorbed
by the body and uses this information
to calculate the bone density.
density The ※compactness§ of a subs-
tance, defined as its mass per unit
volume. In radiology, the term relates to
the amount of radiation absorbed by the
structure being X-rayed. Bone, which ab-
sorbs radiation well, appears white on
X-ray film. A lung, which contains mostly
air, absorbs little radiation and is dark
on film. The same holds true in CTscan-
ning and MRI. (See also specific gravity.)
dental emergencies Injuries or disor-
ders of the teeth and gums that require
immediate treatment because of severe
pain and/or because delay could lead to
poor healing or complications. A dis-
lodged tooth can be reimplanted (see
reimplantation, dental) successfully if it is
done without delay. A partly dislodged
tooth should be manipulated back into
the socket straight away. Other dental
emergencies include a broken tooth
(see  fracture, dental), severe  toothache,
which may be caused by an abscess
(see  abscess, dental), and Vincent＊s dis-
ease (see gingivitis, acute ulcerative).
dental examination An examination of
the mouth, gums, and teeth by a dentist
as a routine check or as part of the
assessment a person complaining of a
symptom. Routine examinations enable
tooth decay and gum disease to be
detected and treated at an early stage. 
During a routine dental examination,
the dentist uses a metal instrument to
DENDRITIC ULCER DENTAL EXAMINATION
D
X-ray detector picks
up unabsorbed
X-rays
Monitor displays X-ray
image of spine
X-ray
generator
Foam support
for legs
DENSITOMETRYscaling (removal of calculi) and advise
on oral hygiene methods.
dentition The arrangement, number, and
type of teeth in the mouth. In young
children, primary dentition comprises
20 teeth (incisors, canines, and molars).
These teeth are replaced between the
ages of 7 and 13 years by secondary (per-
manent) dentition. Secondary dentition
comprises 32 teeth (incisors, canines,
premolars, and molars). The third molars
(wisdom teeth) may not erupt until 18每21
years of age. (See also eruption of teeth.)
165
probe for dental cavities, chipped teeth,
or fillings. Dental X-rays are sometimes
carried out to check for problems that
may not be visible. Dentists also check
how well the upper and lowerteeth
come together. Regular examinations in
children enable the monitoring of the
replacement of primary teeth by perma-
nent, or secondary, teeth. Referral for
orthodontic treatment may be made.
dental extraction See tooth extraction.
dental X-ray An image of the teeth 
and jaws that provides information for
detecting, diagnosing, and treating con-
ditions that can threaten oral and
general health. There are 3 types of den-
tal  X-ray: periapical X-ray, bite-wing
X-ray, and panoramic X-ray.
Periapical X-rays are taken using X-ray
film held behind the teeth. They give
detailed images of whole teeth and the
surrounding tissues. They show unerupt-
edor impacted teeth, root fractures,
abscesses, cysts, and tumours, and can
help diagnose some skeletal diseases.
Bite-wing X-rays show the crowns of the
teeth and can detect areas of decay and
changes in bone due to periodontal dis-
ease. Panoramic X-rays show all the
teeth and surrounding structures on one
large film. They can show unerupted or
impacted teeth, cysts, jaw fractures, or
tumours. The amount of radiation re-
ceived from dental X-rays is extremely
small. However, dental X-rays should be
avoided during pregnancy.
dentifrice A paste, powder, or gel used
with a toothbrush to clean the teeth. It
contains a mild abrasive, detergents,
binding and moistening agents, thick-
ening agents, colourings, flavourings,
and usually fluoride. 
dentine Hard tissue surrounding the
pulp of a tooth (see teeth).
dentistry The science or profession
concerned with the teeth and their sup-
porting structures. Most dentists work
in general dental practice; others prac-
tise in a specialized branch of dentistry.
Dentists in general practice undertake
all aspects of dental care. They may refer
patients to a consultant in one of the
specialized branches of dentistry, such as
orthodontics, prosthetics, endodontics, and
periodontics. Dental hygienists carry out
DENTITION DENTAL EXTRACTION
D
Central
incisor
Central
incisor
Lateral
incisor
Lateral
incisor
Second
premolar
UPPER
TEETH
UPPER
TEETH
LOWER
TEETH
LOWER
TEETH
First
molar
First
molar
Second
molar
Second
molar
First
premolar
Third
molar
DENTITION
Canine
Canine
PRIMARYTEETH
SECONDARY TEETH166
denture An appliance that replaces miss-
ing natural teeth. It consists of a metal
and/or acrylic base mounted with porce-
lain or acrylic teeth. The artificial teeth
are matched to be similar to the origi-
nal teeth. Denture baseplates, created
from impressions taken from the upper
and lower gums, fit the mouth accurately.
deodorant A substance that removes un-
pleasant odours, especially body odours.
deoxyribonucleic acid See DNA;  nu-
cleic acids.
dependence Psychological or physical
reliance on persons or drugs. An infant is
naturally dependent on parents, but, as
he or she grows, dependence normally
wanes. Alcohol and drugs may induce a
state of physical or emotional depen-
dence in users. A person who has a
dependency may develop physical symp-
toms or emotional distress if deprived
of the drug. (See also  alcohol depen-
dence; drug dependence.)
depersonalization A state of feeling
unreal, in which there is a sense of
detachment from self and surroundings.
Depersonalization is often accompa-
nied by derealization. It is rarely serious
and usually comes on suddenly and may
last for moments or for hours. Deper-
sonalization most often occurs in people
with anxietydisorders. Other causes in-
clude drugs and temporal lobe epilepsy.
depilatory A chemical hair remover, such
as barium sulphide, used in the form of
a cream or paste for cosmetic reasons
and to treat hirsutism.
depot injection An intramuscular in-
jection of a drug that gives a slow,
steady release of its active chemicals
into the bloodstream. Release of the
drug is slowed by the inclusion of sub-
stances such as oil or wax. The release
of the active drug can be made to last
for hours, days, or weeks.
A depot injection is useful for patients
who may not take their medication cor-
rectly. It also prevents the necessity of
giving a series of injections over a short
period. Hormonal contraceptives (see
contraception, hormonal methods of),
corticosteroid drugs, and  antipsychotic
drugs may be given by depot injection.
Side effects may arise due to the uneven
release of the drug into the bloodstream.
depression Feelings of sadness, hope-
lessness, and a loss of interest in life,
combined with a sense of reduced emo-
tional well-being. Symptoms vary with the
severity of the depression. It may cause
loss of appetite, difficulty in sleeping,
tiredness, loss of interest in social
activities, concentration problems, and,
sometimes, anxiety. The severely depres-
sed may have thoughts of  suicide and
feelings of worthlessness. Hallucinations
or delusions may occur in extreme cases.
Often, there is no single obvious cause.
It may be triggered by physical illnesses
(such as a viral infection), hormonal
disorders (such as  hypothyroidism), or
hormonal changes  after childbirth (see
postnatal depression).Some drugs, such
as oral contraceptives, may contribute.
Inheritance may play a part. Some peo-
ple become depressed in winter (see
seasonal affective disorder syndrome).
Aside from these causes, social and
psychological factors may play a part. 
Treatment usually includes a form of
psychological treatment, such as cogni-
tive每behavioural therapy or  counselling
and/or antidepressant drugs. Antidepres-
sant drugs are usually effective over a
period of time.  ECT (electroconvulsive
therapy) is infrequently used for treat-
ing severely depressed people who have
not responded to other treatments.
derealization Feeling that the world
has become unreal. It usually occurs
together with depersonalization and may
be caused by fatigue,  hallucinogenic
drugs, or disordered brain function.
dermabrasion Removal of the surface
layer of the skin by high-speed sanding
to improve the appearance of scars,
such as from acne, or to remove tattoos. 
dermatitis Inflammation of the skin,
sometimes due to an allergy. Dermatitis
is the same as  eczema, and the terms
can be used interchangeably.
Seborrhoeic dermatitis is a red, scaly,
itchy rash that develops on the face,
scalp, chest, and back. The rash often
develops during times of stress and is
probably caused by an excess growth of
yeast on the skin.  Corticosteroid drugs
and/or drugs that kill microorganisms
may help. Contact dermatitis results from
a reaction to some substance that comes
DENTURE DERMATITIS
D(T1每T12), lumbar (L1每L5), and sacral
(S1每S5) regions. The entire body surface
is an interlocking pattern of dermatomes,
which is similar from one person to an-
other. Abnormal sensation in a dermatome
signifies damage to a particular nerve
root, commonly due to a disc prolapse. 
dermatome, surgical A surgical in-
strument for cutting varying thicknesses
of skin for use in skin grafting. 
dermatomyositis A rare  autoimmune
disorder in which the muscles and skin
become inflamed. It causes a skin rash
first on the bridge of the nose and cheeks,
followed by a purple discoloration on the
eyelids and sometimes a red rash on
theknees, knuckles, and elbows. Muscles
become weak, stiff, and painful, particu-
larly those in the shoulders and pelvis. 
Treatment is with  corticosteroid drugs
and/or  immunosuppressant drugs and
physiotherapy. In about 50 per cent of
cases, full recovery occurs after a few
years. The remainder have persistent
muscle weakness. In about 20 per cent,
it eventually affects the lungs and other
organs and may be fatal. 
dermatophyte infections A group of
common fungal infections affecting the
skin, hair, and nails, also known as
tinea and, popularly, as ringworm.
dermis The inner layer of the skin.
dermographism Abnormal sensitivity
of the skin to mechanical irritation, to
the extent that firm stroking leads to the
appearance of itchy weals. The condi-
tion is a form of  urticaria. It is most
common in fair-skinned people with a
tendency to allergic conditions. 
dermoid cyst A noncancerous tumour
with a cell structure similar to that of
skin. It contains hairs, sweat glands, and
sebaceous glands. Dermoid cysts may
also contain fragments of cartilage, bone,
and even teeth. The cysts may occur in
various parts of the body. Ovarian der-
moid cysts account for 10 per cent of all
ovarian tumours. Only rarely do they
become cancerous. In the skin, dermoid
cysts most commonly occur on the
head or neck. Surgical removal is usual-
ly recommended. (See also teratoma).
dermoid tumour See dermoid cyst.
desensitization A technique, used in
behaviour therapy  for treating  phobias,
in contact with the skin. Common caus-
es are detergents, nickel, certain plants,
and cosmetics. It may be treated with
topical corticosteroids. A patch test (see
skintests) may be done to identify the
cause. Photodermatitis occurs in peo-
ple whose skin is abnormally sensitive
to light. A cluster of spots or blisters
occurs on any part of the body exposed
to the sun (see photosensitivity).
dermatitis artefacta Any self-induced
skin condition. It may range from a mild
scratch to extensive mutilation.
dermatitis herpetiformis A chronic skin
disease in which clusters of tiny, red,
intensely itchy blisters occur in a sym-
metrical pattern, most commonly on the
back, elbows, knees, buttocks, and scalp.
It usually develops in adult life and is
believed to be related to coeliac disease.
dermatology The branch of medicine
concerned with the skin and its disorders.
dermatome An area of skin supplied
with nerves by a pair of spinal nerve
roots from the cervical (C2每C8), thoracic
167
DESENSITIZATION DERMATITIS ARTEFACTA
D
Sacral region
(nerve S3)
Sacral region
(nerve S4)
Sacral
region
(nerve S5)
Sacral region
(nerve S1)
Sacral region
(nerve S2)
Cervical region
(nerve C5)
Cervical region
(nerve C2)
Cervical
region
(nerve C7)
Cervical region
(nerve C8)
Cervical region
(nerve C3)
Cervical region
(nerve C4)
Thoracic region
(nerves T1-T12)
Cervical region
(nerve C6)
Lumbar region
(nerves L1-L5)
Lumbar region
(nerve L1)
Lumbar region
(nerve L2)
Lumbar region
(nerve L3)
Lumbar region
(nerve L4)
Lumbar region
(nerve L5)
DERMATOME168
in which the patient is gradually expo-
sed to the cause of the fear.
desensitization, allergy See hyposen-
sitization.
desferrioxamine A drug used to rid
the body tissues of excess  iron that
accumulates as a result of repeated
blood transfusions in anaemias, such
as aplastic anaemia and thalassaemia. It
is also used to treat iron poisoning and
may also be used to treat excess  alu-
minium in people on dialysis. The drug
is administered by intravenous injec-
tion or subcutaneous infusion and may
be given with vitamin C to boost excre-
tion of the iron. Side effects may
include gastrointestinal disturbances,
dizziness, and skin reactions. 
designer drugs A group of illegally
produced chemicals that mimic the
effects of specific drugs of abuse. They
can cause  drug dependence and  drug
poisoning. Made in illicit laboratories,
they are cheap to produce and undercut
the street prices of drugs.
There are 3 major groups: drugs derived
from opioid analgesic drugs such as fen-
tanyl; drugs similar to amfetamines,
such as ecstasy; and variants of phency-
clidine (PCP), a hallucinogenic drug.
These highly potent drugs are not tested
for adverse effects or for the strength of
the tablets or capsules, making their use
hazardous. For example, some deriva-
tives of fentanyl are 20每2,000 times more
powerful than  morphine. Amfetamine
derivatives can cause brain damage at
doses only slightly higher than those
required for a stimulant effect. Many
designer drugs contain impurities that
can cause permanent damage.
desmoid tumour A growth, usually in
the abdominal wall. The tumour is hard,
with a well-defined edge. The tumours
occur most frequently in women who
have had children. They may also arise
at the sites of old surgical incisions.
Surgical removal is the usual treatment.
desmopressin A synthetic form of ADH
(antidiuretic hormone) that is used to
treat diabetes insipidus and bed-wetting
(see enuresis).
desogestrel  A  progestogen drug used
with ethinylestradiol as an ingredient of
some combined  oralcontraceptives.
Desogestrel is reported to have a slightly
higher risk of venous  thromboembolism
than older drugs. Side effects of deso-
gestrel include weight changes and
fluid retention. There may also be nau-
sea, vomiting, headache, depression,
and breast tenderness.
detergent poisoning The toxic effects
that occur as a result of swallowing the
cleaning agents in shampoos, laundry
powders, and cleaning liquids. 
development The process of growth and
change by which an individual matures
physically, mentally, emotionally, and
socially. Development takes place in
major phases: during the first 2 months
of pregnancy (see  embryo); to a lesser
extent, during the rest of pregnancy
(see fetus); during the first 5 years of life
(see  child development); and during
puberty and adolescence. 
developmental delay A term used if a
baby or young child has not achieved
new abilities within the normal time
range. Normally, new abilities and new
patterns of behaviour appear at given
ages, and existing patterns of behaviour
change and sometimes disappear (see
child development). 
Delays vary in severity and may affect
the development of hand每eye coord-
ination, walking, listening, language,
speech, or social interaction. Delay may
first be noticed by parents or detected
during a routine developmental check.
There are many causes of develop-
mental delay. A child who is late in
most aspects of development usually
has a generalized problem. This may be
due to severe visual or hearing impair-
ment, limited intellectual abilities (see
learning difficulties), or damage to the
brain before, during, or after birth. 
Specific areas of delay may occur in
movement and walking. Often there is
no serious cause. However, specific
causes may include muscular dystrophy
and  spina bifida. Delay in developing
manipulative skills is often due to lack
of adequate stimulation.
A lack of response to sound may be
due to deafness. Autism is a rare cause
of unresponsiveness to the human
voice although hearing is normal. A
hearing problem may cause delayed
DESENSITIZATION, ALLERGYDEVELOPMENTAL DELAY
D169
speech. Twins are often late talkers. Any
generalized difficulty with muscle con-
trol can affect speech production; this
may occur in children with cerebral
palsy. Damage to, or structural defects
of, the speech muscles, larynx (voice
box), or mouth may also cause speech
difficulties, as may any disorder affect-
ing the speech area of the brain (see
aphasia;  dysarthria;  dysphonia;  speech
disorders). Delay in bladder and bowel
control have many possible causes (see
encopresis; enuresis; soiling).
A child who shows signs of develop-
mental delay should undergo a full
assessment by a paediatrician.
developmental hip dysplasia A dis-
order present at birth in which the head
of the  femur (thigh-bone) fails to fit
properly into the cup-like socket in the
pelvis to form a joint. One or both of the
hips may be affected.
The cause of developmental hip dys-
plasia is not known, although it is more
common in girls, especially babies born
by breech delivery or following pregnan-
cies in which the amount of amniotic
fluid was abnormally small.
If dislocation is detected in early
infancy,  splints are applied to the thigh
to manoeuvre the ball of the joint into
the socket and keep it in position.
These are worn for about 3 months and
usually correct the problem. Progress
may be monitored by  ultrasound scan-
ning and X-rays. Corrective surgery may
also be required. 
If treatment is delayed, there may be
lifelong problems with walking. Without
treatment, the dislocation often leads
to shortening of the leg, limping, and
early osteoarthritis in the joint.
deviated nasal septum See nasal sep-
tum.
deviation, sexual A form of sexual beha-
viour, most common in men, in which
intercourse between adults is not the
final aim. Forms of sexual deviation
include  exhibitionism,  fetishism,  paedo-
philia, and transvestism. 
dexamethasone A  corticosteroid drug
prescribed as a nasal spray to relieve
nasal congestion caused by allergic
rhinitis, as eye drops in the treatment of
iritis, and as eardrops in the treatment
of otitis externa. It is given in tablet form
or injected to treat severe  asthma and
other inflammatory disorders in order
to reduce inflammation of the brain
due, for example, to head injury. It may
be injected into an inflamed joint to
relieve the symptoms of osteoarthritis.
The nasal spray may cause nose-
bleeds; eye drops may cause irritation.
Prolonged use or high doses of tablet
may cause adverse effects common to
the corticosteroids. 
dexamfetamine A central nervous sys-
tem stimulant (see  amfetaminedrugs;
stimulantdrugs) sometimes used to treat
narcolepsy. It is also used in children
with attention deficit hyperactivity disor-
der. Because of its stimulant properties,
dexamfetamine has become a drug of
abuse. With prolonged use, the stimulant
effects lessen and a higher dose must
be taken to produce the same effect.
DEXA scan Dual-energy X-ray absorp-
tiometry, a technique that measures
bone density by passing beams of low-
dose radiation through bone. DEXA scans
are used to assess the severity of osteo-
porosis. (See also densitometry.)
dextrocardia A rare condition, present
from birth, in which the heart points to
the right-hand side of the chest instead
of the left. The heart may also be mal-
formed. Sometimes, the position of the
abdominal organs is also reversed. The
cause of dextrocardia is unknown. Sur-
gical treatment is only necessary if the
heart is malformed.
dextromethorphan A cough suppres-
sant available over the counter as an
ingredient in cough remedies.
dextromoramide An opioid  analgesic
drug related to opium that is used to
relieve severe pain following injury or
surgery and during long-term illnesses.
It relieves pain quickly but has only a
short duration of action. Regular use
can produce drug dependence.
dextropropoxyphene A weak opioid
analgesic drug included in some com-
pound analgesic preparations. It works
rapidly and relieves mild to moderate
pain for about 4 hours. Adverse effects
may include drowsiness, dizziness, nau-
sea, and vomiting. 
dextrose Another name for glucose.
DEXTROSE DEVELOPMENTAL HIP DYSPLASIA
D170
diabetes, bronze Another name for
haemochromatosis, a rare genetic dis-
ease in which excessive amounts of iron
are deposited in tissues. It causes a
bronze skin coloration, and sufferers
often develop diabetes mellitus.
diabetes insipidus A rare condition
characterized by excessive thirst and
the passing of large quantities of dilute
urine. It usually results from a failure of
the  pituitary gland to secrete  ADH
(antidiuretic hormone). Diseases of the
pituitary gland can cause failure of ADH
secretion. The condition may temporar-
ily follow brain surgery. Treatment uses
a nasal spray containing ADH. A rare
form of the disease, nephrogenic dia-
betes insipidus, is due to the kidneys
not responding to ADH; treatment is by
a low-sodium diet and, paradoxically,
thiazides (see diuretic drugs). 
diabetes mellitus A disorder caused
by insufficient or absent production of
the hormone insulin by the pancreas, or
because the tissues are resistant to the
effects. Insulin is responsible for the ab-
sorption of  glucose into cells. Lack of
insulin causes high blood levels of glu-
cose, resulting in the passage of large
quantities of urine and excessive thirst.
Other symptoms are weight loss, hunger,
and fatigue. Urinary tract infections may
also occur.  Lipid (fat) metabolism is
affected and small blood vessels degen-
erate. Undiagnosed diabetes can lead
to blurred vision, boils, and tingling or
numbness of the hands and feet.
There are 2 main types of diabetes
mellitus, both of which tend to run in
families. Type 1 (insulin-dependent) dia-
betes is the less common form of the
disorder and usually develops in child-
hood or adolescence. In this type of
diabetes, insulin-secreting cells in the
pancreas are destroyed, and insulin
production ceases. Type 2 (noninsulin-
dependent) diabetes generally develops
gradually, mainly in people over the age
of 40. Although insulin is still produced,
there is not enough for the body＊s
needs as the tissues become relatively
resistant to its effects. Symptoms may
be present in only a 3rd of people with
this type of diabetes; it is often diag-
nosed only when complications occur.
Treatment aims to keep blood glucose
as normal as possible. It involves achiev-
ing and maintaining a normal weight,
regular physical activity, dietary man-
agement, and, if necessary, treatments
with antidiabetic drugs.
People with type 1 diabetes require
regular insulin injections. Carbohydrate
intake is spread out over the day, intake
of fats should be kept low, and self-
monitoring of blood glucose levels is
important. If the glucose/insulin bal-
ance is not maintained, hyperglycaemia
or hypoglycaemia may develop.
Treatment of type 2 diabetes usually
consists of dietary measures, weight
reduction, and antidiabetic drugs, often
hypoglycaemic drugs such as sulphony-
lureas. Some people eventually need
insulin injections. 
Complications of diabetes mellitus
include  retinopathy, peripheral  neuro-
pathy, and  nephropathy. Ulcers on the
feet are another risk. People with dia-
betes mellitus also have a greater risk
of  atherosclerosis,  hypertension, other
cardiovascular disorders, and cataracts. 
With modern treatment and sensible
self-monitoring, nearly all diabetics can
look forward to a normal lifespan.
diabetic pregnancy Pregnancy in a wo-
man with pre-existing diabetes mellitus or
in a woman who develops diabetesdur-
ing pregnancy. The latter is known as
gestational diabetes. Women with es-
tablished diabetes mellitus can have a
normal pregnancy provided that the di-
abetes is controlled well. Poor control of
blood glucose during the pregnancy may
affect the baby＊s growth or increase the
risk of complications during pregnancy. 
Gestational diabetes is usually detect-
ed in the second half of pregnancy. The
mother does not produce enough
insulin to keep blood glucose levels
normal. True gestational diabetes dis-
appears with the delivery of the baby
but is associated with an increased risk
of developing type 2 diabetes in later life.
diagnosis The process of finding the
nature of a disorder. The doctor listens
to a patient＊s account of his or her illness
and a physical examination is usually
involved. Tests may be ordered after the
formation of a provisional diagnosis.
DIABETES, BRONZE DIAGNOSIS
D171
dialysis A filtering technique used to
remove waste products from the blood
and excess fluid from the body as a
treatment for kidney failure. The kidneys
normally filter about 1,500litres of blood
daily. They maintain the fluid and elec-
trolyte balance of the body and excrete
wastes in the urine. Important elements,
such as sodium, potassium, calcium,
amino acids, glucose, and water are re-
absorbed. Urea, excess minerals, toxins,
and drugs are excreted. Dialysis is used
to perform this function in people whose
kidneys have been damaged due to
acute kidney failure or chronic kidney
failure. Without dialysis, wastes accu-
mulate in the blood. In chronic kidney
failure, patients may need to have dialy-
sis several times a week for the rest of
their lives or until they can be given a
kidney transplant. In acute kidney failure,
dialysis is carried out more intensively
until the kidneys are working normally.
There are 2 methods of dialysis: haemo-
dialysis and peritoneal dialysis. In both
methods, excess water and wastes in the
blood pass across a membrane into a
solution (dialysate), which is then discard-
ed.Haemodialysis filters out wastes by
passing blood through an artificial kid-
ney machine. The process takes 2每6 hours.
Peritoneal dialysis makes use of the
peritoneum (the membrane that lines
the abdomen) as a filter. The procedure
is often carried out overnight or contin-
uously during the day and night. Both
types of dialysis carry the risk of upset-
ting body chemistry and fluid balance.
There is also a risk of infection within
the peritoneum in peritoneal dialysis.
diamorphine A synthetic, opioid  anal-
gesic drug similar to  morphine; it is
another name for heroin. Diamorphine
is used to relieve severe pain and also
to relieve distress in acute heart failure.
It carries the risk of dependence so is
prescribed with caution. The drug may
also cause nausea, vomiting, and con-
stipation. (See also heroin abuse.)
diaphragm, contraceptive A female
barrier method of contraception in the
form of a hemispherical dome of thin
rubber with a metal spring in the rim.
(See also contraception, barrier methods.)
diaphragm muscle The dome-shaped
sheet of muscle that separates the chest
from the abdomen. It is attached to the
spine, ribs, and sternum (breastbone)
DIAPHRAGM MUSCLE DIALYSIS
D
Fresh
dialysate
Blood pump
Blood
tubing
Dialysate
tubing
Bag of used
dialysate
Saline solution
DIALYSIS
PERITONEALDIALYSIS HAEMODIALYSIS
Blood 
filter
Monitor
Connection
to vein
Dialysate
tubing
Fresh dialysate
fluid172
and plays an important role in breathing.
There are openings in the diaphragmfor
the oesophagus and major nerves and
blood vessels. To inhale, the diaphragm＊s
muscle fibres contract, pulling the whole
diaphragm downwards and drawing air
into the lungs. (See also breathing.)
diaphysis The shaft, or central portion,
of a long bone, such as the  femur. The
epiphysis (end of the long bone) devel-
ops independently from the diaphysis,
as they are initially separated by a mass
of cartilage known as the epiphyseal
plate. The diaphysis and epiphysis even-
tually fuse to form a complete bone.
diarrhoea Increased fluidity, frequency,
or volume of bowel movements. It may
be acute or chronic. Diarrhoea can be
very serious in infants and elderly peo-
ple because of the risk of severe,
potentially fatal, dehydration. 
Acute diarrhoea is usually a result of
consuming food or water contaminated
with certain bacteria or viruses (see food
poisoning). Infective gastroenteritis also
causes diarrhoea and may be acquired
as a result of droplet infection. Other
causes of acute diarrhoea include anxi-
ety and, less commonly,  amoebiasis,
shigellosis, typhoid fever and paratyphoid
fever, drug toxicity,  food allergy, and
food intolerance. 
Chronic diarrhoea is generally repeat-
ed attacks of acute diarrhoea. It may be
the result of an intestinal disorder such
as Crohn＊s disease, ulcerative colitis, can-
cer of the colon (see colon, cancer of), or
irritable bowel syndrome. Diarrhoea that
recurs, persists for more than a week, or
is accompanied by blood requires med-
ical investigation.
The water and electrolytes (salts) lost
during a severe attack of diarrhoea need
to be replaced to prevent dehydration.
Ready-prepared powders of electrolyte
mixtures can be bought (see  rehyd-
ration therapy).  Antidiarrhoeal drugs,
such as  diphenoxylate and  loperamide,
should not be taken to treat attacks of
diarrhoea due to infection; they may pro-
long it. Drugs may help if the diarrhoea
is disabling or if there is abdominal pain.
Viral gastroenteritis in a child can
damage the lining of the intestine,
which may lead to  lactose intolerance
and further diarrhoea. Seek medical
attention if diarrhoea in an infant per-
sists for more than 48 hours. Call a
doctor urgently if the infant is dehydrat-
ed. (See also rehydration therapy.)
diastole The period in the heartbeat cycle
when the heart muscle is at rest; it alter-
nates with systole,the period of muscular
contraction. (See also cardiac cycle).
diastolic pressure The lowest level of
blood pressure measured in the main
arteries. Diastolic pressure is the pressure
between heartbeats when the ventricles
are relaxed and filling with blood. Sys-
tolic pressure, the highest level of blood
pressure in the arteries, occurs when
the ventricles contract. The normal range
varies with age and between individuals,
but a young adult usually has a dias-
tolic pressure of about 80mmHg (mm
of mercury) and a systolic pressure of
around 120mmHg. A persistently high
diastolic pressure occurs in most cases
of hypertension.
diathermy The production of heat in a
part of the body using high-frequency
electric currents or microwaves. It can
be used to increase blood flow and to
reduce deep-seated pain. Diathermy
can also be used to destroy tumours
and diseased parts without causing
bleeding. A diathermy knife is used by
surgeons to coagulate bleeding vessels
or to separate tissues without causing
them to bleed (see electrocoagulation).
diathesis A predisposition towards cer-
tain disorders. For example, a bleeding
diathesis is present when a  bleeding
disorder makes a person susceptible to
prolonged bleeding after an injury.
diazepam One of the  benzodiazepine
drugs, used mainly for the short-term
treatment of anxiety and  insomnia. It is
also prescribed as a  muscle-relaxant
drug, as an  anticonvulsant drug in the
DIAPHYSIS DIAZEPAM
D
EpiphysisEpiphysis
DIAPHYSIS
Diaphysis173
emergency treatment of epilepsy, and to
treat alcohol withdrawal symptoms. It
may also be given intravenously to pro-
duce sedation in people undergoing
certain procedures, such as endoscopy.
Diazepam may cause drowsiness, diz-
ziness, and confusion; therefore driving
and hazardous work should be avoided.
Diazepam can be habit-forming.
DIC See  disseminated intravascular co-
agulation.
diclofenac A  nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
matory drug (NSAID) used to relieve
pain and stiffness in  arthritis and to
hasten recovery following injury. Side
effects may include nausea, abdominal
pain, and peptic ulcer.
diet See nutrition.
diet and disease Several diseases are
linked with diet. Diseases due to a defi-
ciency are rare in developed countries,
but many disorders are due partly to
overconsumption of certain foods. A
diet high in fats may contribute to
atherosclerosis and heart disease. A
high-fat diet has also been linked with
cancer of the bowel (see  colon, cancer
of) and breast cancer. Obesity increases
the risk of many other disorders, includ-
ing diabetes mellitus and stroke.
Overconsumption of  alcohol can lead
to various  alcohol-related disorders. A
high salt intake predisposes a person
towards  hypertension. Some compon-
ents of the diet protect against disease.
For example, fibre protects against  di-
verticular disease, chronic  constipation,
and haemorrhoids. 
Many people＊s diets contain too few
natural vitamins. Pregnant women need
high intakes of  folic acid to reduce the
risk of neural tube defects. 
Although many illnesses are commonly
ascribed to food allergy, it is only rarely
that a definite link is proved. (See also
nutritional disorders).
dietetics The application of nutritional
science to maintain or restore health. It
involves a knowledge of the composi-
tion of foods, the effects of cooking and
processing, and dietary requirements,
as well as psychological aspects, such as
eating habits (see nutrition).
diethylstilbestrol A synthetic form of
the female sex hormone  oestrogen,
occasionally used to treat prostate can-
cer (see  prostate, cancer of) and, in
postmenopausal women only,  breast
cancer. Common side effects include
nausea,  oedema, and breast enlarge-
ment (gynaecomastia) in men.
differentiation The process by which
the cells of the early embryo diversify to
form the distinct tissues and organs. It
also means the degree to which the
microscopic appearance of cancerous
tissue resembles normal tissue.
diffusion The spread of a substance in
a fluid from an area of high concentra-
tion to one of lower concentration.
diflunisal A nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drug (NSAID) used to relieve joint
pain and stiffness in types of  arthritis.
The drug is also given for back pain,
sprains, and strains. Side effects include
nausea, diarrhoea, and a rash. 
digestion The process by which food is
broken down into smaller components
that can be transported and used by the
body. (See also digestive system). 
digestive system The group of organs
responsible for  digestion. It consists of
the digestive tract (also known as the
alimentary tract or canal) and various
associated organs. The digestive tract
consists of the mouth, pharynx, oesoph-
agus,  stomach,  intestines, and the anus.
The intestines are the small intestine
(comprising the  duodenum,  jejunum,
and ileum) and the large intestine (com-
prising the caecum, colon, and rectum).
The associated organs, such as the sali-
vary glands, liver, and pancreas, secrete
digestive juices that break down food as
it goes through the tract.
Food and the products of digestion
are moved from the throat to the rec-
tum by  peristalsis (waves of muscular
contractions of the intestinal wall). 
Food is broken down into simpler sub-
stances before being absorbed into the
bloodstream.Physical breakdown is per-
formed by the teeth, which cut and chew,
and the stomach, which churns the
food. The chemical breakdown of food
is performed by the action of enzymes,
acids, and salts. 
Carbohydrates are broken down into
simple sugars. Proteins are broken down
into  polypeptides,  peptides, and  amino
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM DIC
D174
acids.  Fats are broken down into  glyc-
erol, glycerides, and fatty acids. 
In the mouth, saliva lubricates food and
contains enzymes that begin to break
down carbohydrates. The tongue moulds
food into balls (called boli) for easy swal-
lowing. The food then passes into the
pharynx. From here, it is pushed into
the oesophagus and squeezed down
into the stomach, where it is mixed with
hydrochloric acid and pepsin. Produced
by the stomach lining, these substances
help break down proteins. When the food
has been converted to a semi-liquid con-
sistency, it passes into the duodenum
where bile salts and acids (produced by
the liver) help to break down fats.
Digestive juices released by the pancreas
into the duodenum contain enzymes
that further break down food. Break-
down ends in the small intestine, carried
out by enzymes produced by glands in
the intestinal lining. Nutrients are ab-
sorbed in the small intestine. The residue
enters the large intestine, where water
is absorbed. Undigested matter is ex-
pelled via the rectum and anus as faeces.
digit A division, such as a  finger or  toe,
located at the end of a limb.
digitalis drugs A group of drugs that
are extracted from plants belonging to
the foxglove family. They are used to
treat heart conditions, most  commonly
atrial fibrillation. Those most frequently
used are digitoxin and digoxin.
digital subtraction angiography See
angiography.
digitoxin A long-acting  digitalis drug
used to treat  heart failure and certain
types of arrhythmia.
digoxin The most widely used of the
digitalis drugs. It is used in the treat-
ment of  heart failure and certain types
of arrhythmia, such as atrial fibrillation. 
Blood tests may sometimes beneeded
to ensure the correct digoxin dose, esp-
ecially in patients with kidney disease.
An excessive dose may cause headache,
loss of appetite, nausea, and vomiting.
Digoxin occasionally disrupts the nor-
mal heartbeat, causing heart block.
dihydrocodeine A type of  analgesic
drug. Its side effects include nausea
and vomiting. 
dilatation A condition in which a body
cavity, tube, or opening is enlarged or
stretched due to normal physiological
processes or because of disease. The
term dilatation also refers to proce-
dures for achieving such enlargement,
as in dilatation and curettage. 
dilatation and curettage See D and C.
dilation A term that is sometimes used
as an alternative to dilatation.
dilator An instrument for stretching and
enlarging a narrowed body cavity, tube,
or opening.
diltiazem A  calcium channel blocker
used in the treatment of  hypertension
and  angina pectoris. Side effects may
include headache, appetite loss, nau-
sea, constipation, and swollen ankles.
dimeticone A silicone-based substance,
also known as simeticone, that is used
in barrier creams and as an antifoaming
agent in antacid preparations.
dioptre A unit of the power of refraction
(※strength§) of a lens; the greater the
power, the stronger the lens. Lenses
that cause parallel light rays to con-
verge have a positive dioptric number
and are used to correct longsightedness
DIGIT DIOPTRE
Stomach
Pharynx
Anus
Pancreas
Oesophagus
Salivary
glands
Liver
Gallbladder
Appendix
Large
intestine
DIGESTIVESYSTEM
Small
intestine
Rectum
D175
(see  hypermetropia). Those that cause
divergence have a negative number and
are used to correct shortsightedness
(see myopia).
dioxin A highly toxic group of chemi-
cals. They are contaminants of some
defoliant weedkillers (see defoliant poi-
soning; Agent Orange). 
diphenhydramine An antihistamine drug
used to treat allergic disorders such as
urticaria and allergic rhinitis. It is also
used for the relief of temporary sleep
disturbance. Some cough remedies con-
tain the drug. It can cause drowsiness,
dry mouth and blurred vision. 
diphenoxylate An  antidiarrhoeal drug
related to the opioid analgesic drugs. It
lessens the contractions of the muscles
in the intestinal walls, reducing the fre-
quency of bowel movements.
diphtheria A bacterial infection that
causes a sore throat, fever, and some-
times serious or fatal complications. It is
caused by CORYNEBACTERIUM DIPHTHERAE.
During infection, the bacterium may
multiply in the throat or skin. In the
throat, bacterial multiplication gives
rise to a membrane that may cover the
tonsils and spread up over the palate or
down to the larynx and trachea, causing
breathing difficulties. Other symptoms
are enlarged lymph nodes in the neck,
increased heart rate, and fever. Some-
times, infection is confined to the skin.
Life-threatening symptoms develop only
in nonimmune people and are caused
by a toxin released by the bacterium. A
victim may collapse and die within a
day of developing throat symptoms.
More often the person is recovering from
diphtheria when heart failure or paraly-
sis of the throat or limbs develops. 
Diphtheria is treated with antibiotics.
An antitoxin is also given if diphtheria
affects the throat. If severe breathing
difficulties develop, a tracheostomy may
be needed. Mass immunization has made
diphtheria rare in developed countries.
diplegia Paralysis affecting both sides
of the body (both legs and, to a lesser
extent, both arms).
diplopia The medical term used to
describe double vision.
dipsomania A form of  alcohol depen-
dence in which periods of excessive
drinking and craving for drink alternate
with periods of relative sobriety. 
dipyridamole A drug that reduces the
stickiness of platelets in the blood and
thereby helps to prevent the formation
of abnormal blood clots within arteries.
Dipyridamole is used with  aspirin or
warfarin to prevent the formation of
clots following  heart-valve surgery. It
may also be given to  people who have
had a recent  myocardial infarction or
undergonea  coronary artery bypass.
Dipyridamole may also reduce the fre-
quency of  transient ischaemic attacks.
Possible adverse may include head-
ache, flushing, and dizziness.
disability A physical or mental loss or
impairment that is measurable. (See
also handicap; rehabilitation.)
discharge A visible emission of fluid
from an orifice or a break in the skin. A
discharge may be a normal occurrence,
as in some types of  vaginal discharge,
but it could also be due to an infection
or inflammation. 
disc, intervertebral  A flat, circular,
plate-like structure containing  cartilage
that lines the joints between adjacent
vertebrae (bones) in the spine. Each inter-
vertebral disc is composed of a fibrous
outer layer and a soft gelatinous core. It
acts as a shock absorber to cushion the
vertebrae during movements of the spine.
With increasing age, intervertebral discs
become less supple and more suscepti-
ble to damage from injury.
DISC, INTERVERTEBRAL DIOXIN
D
Ligaments
Vertebral
body
Fibrous covering
Gelatinous core
THORACICVERTEBRAE
SECTION OF
INTERVERTEBRAL
DISK
Intervertebral
disk
DISC, INTERVERTEBRAL176
disclosing agents Dyes that make the
plaque deposits on teeth more visible
so that they can be seen and removed. 
discoid lupus erythematosus A form
of the chronic autoimmune disorder
lupus erythematosus.
discoloured teeth Teeth that are ab-
normally coloured or stained. Extrinsic
stains, on the tooth＊s surface, are com-
mon, but are usually easily removed by
polishing. They can be prevented by
regular tooth cleaning. Smoking tobac-
co produces a brownish-black deposit.
Pigment-producing bacteria can leave a
visible line along the teeth, especially
in children. Some dyes in foodstuffs can
cause yellowing; dark brown spots may
be due to areas of thinned enamel
stained by foods. Some bacteria pro-
duce an orange-red stain. Stains may
also follow the use of drugs containing
metallic salts.
Intrinsic stains, within the tooth＊s sub-
stance, are permanent. Causes include
death of the pulp or the removal of the
pulp during  root-canal treatment and
the use of the antibiotic  tetracycline in
children. Mottling of the tooth enamel
occurs if excessive amounts of fluoride
are taken during development of the
enamel (see  fluorosis). Hepatitis during
infancy may cause discoloration of the
primary teeth. The teeth of children
with congenital malformation of the bile
ducts may be similarly affected. 
Many stains can be covered or dimin-
ished with cosmetic dental procedures.
disc prolapse A common disorder of
the spine, in which an intervertebral disc
ruptures and part of its pulpy core pro-
trudes. It causes painful and at times
disabling pressure on a nerve root or,
less commonly, on the spinal cord. The
lower back is most commonly affected.
A prolapsed disc may sometimes be
caused by a sudden strenuous action,
but it usually develops gradually as a
result of degeneration of the discs with
age. If the sciatic nerve root is com-
pressed, it causes sciatica, which may be
accompanied by numbness and tin-
gling, and, eventually, weakness in the
muscles of the leg. A prolapsed disc in
the neck causes neck pain and weak-
ness in the arm and hand. 
Symptoms improve with time and anal-
gesic drugs. However, in severe cases,
surgical techniques, such as  decom-
pression of the spinal canal or removal
of the protruding material and repair of
the disc, may be necessary.
disc, slipped See disc prolapse.
disease Illness or abnormal functioning
of a body part or parts due to a specific
cause, such as an infection, and identi-
fiable by certain symptoms and signs.
disinfectants Substances that kill micro-
organisms and thus prevent infection.
The term is usually applied to strong
chemicals that are used to decontami-
nate inanimate objects, such as items
of medical equipment.
dislocation, joint Complete displace-
ment of the 2 bones in a joint so that
they are no longer in contact, usually as
a result of injury. (Displacement that
leaves the bones in partial contact is
called subluxation.) It is usually accom-
panied by tearing of the joint ligaments
and damage to the membrane that en-
cases the joint. Injury severe enough to
cause dislocation often also causes bone
to fracture. Dislocation restricts or pre-
vents the movement of the joint; it is
usually very painful. The joint looks
misshapen and swells. In some cases,
dislocation is followed by complica-
tions, for example, paralysis.
DISCLOSING AGENTS DISLOCATION, JOINT
D
Fibrous outer
coat of disc
Plane in 
view below
Compressed
nerve root
Spinal
nerves Spinal
cord
Bone of
vertebra
Gelatinous core
LOCATION
DISCPROLAPSE
Protruding
core177
A dislocated joint should only be mani-
pulated by medical personnel. First-aid
treatment consists of applying a  splint
or, in the case of a dislocated shoulder,
a sling. Sometimes, an operation is nec-
essary to reset the bones.
disodium etidronate  See  etidronate
disodium.
disopyramide An  antiarrhythmic drug
used to treat abnormally rapid heart-
beat, as may occur after a  myocardial
infarction (heart attack). It reduces the
force of heart muscle contraction. As a
result, it may aggravate pre-existing
heart failure. Other possible side effects
include dry mouth and constipation.
disorder Any abnormality of physical or
mental function.
disorientation Confusion as to time,
place, or personal identity. Speech and
behaviour tend to be muddled, and the
person often cannot answer questions
about time, date, present location,
name, or address. It is usually due to a
head injury,  intoxication, or a chronic
brain disorder, such as dementia. It may
occasionally be due to somatizationdis-
order (a psychological illness). (See
also confusion; delirium.)
displacement activity The transfer-
ence of feelings from one object or
person to another. This is usually per-
formed consciously to obtain emotional
relief in a manner that will not cause
harm to oneself or to another person.
Some psychotherapists believe that dis-
placement is an unconscious  defence
mechanism, which prevents disturbing
feelings from entering consciousness.
dissection Cutting of body tissues dur-
ing surgery or for the purposes of
anatomical study.
disseminated intravascular coagula-
tion (DIC) A type of bleeding disorder
in which abnormal clotting leads to
depletion of coagulation factors in the
blood; the consequence may be severe
spontaneous bleeding.
dissociative disorders A group of psy-
chological illnesses in which a particular
mental function becomes cut off from
the mind. Types of dissociative disorder
include hysterical amnesia (see hysteria),
fugue, depersonalization, and multiple per-
sonality. (See also conversiondisorder.) 
distal A term describing a part of the
body that is further away from another
part with respect to a central point of
reference, such as the trunk. For exam-
ple, the fingers are distal to the arm.
The opposite of distal is proximal.
disulfiram A drug that acts as a deter-
rent to drinking alcohol. It is prescribed
for people who request help for alcohol
dependence. Treatment is usually com-
bined with a counselling programme.
Disulfiram slows down the clearance of
alcohol in the body, causing flushing,
headache, nausea, dizziness, and palpi-
tations. Symptoms may start within 10
minutes of drinking alcohol and can last
for hours. Occasionally, large amounts
of alcohol taken during treatment can
cause unconsciousness; a person taking
the drug should carry a warning card.
dithranol A drug that is used in the
treatment of psoriasis. Dithranol is pre-
scribed as an ointment, paste, or cream
and works by slowing the rate at which
skin cells multiply. This effect can be
boosted by ultraviolet light treatment
(see phototherapy). Dithranol can cause
skin inflammation.
diuretic drugs Drugs that help remove
excess water from the body by increas-
ing the amount lost as  urine. They are
used in the treatment of various disor-
ders, which include severe premenstrual
syndrome,  hypertension,  heartfailure,
the eye condition  glaucoma,  nephrotic
syndrome, and cirrhosis of the liver. 
Types of diuretic drug differ markedly
in their speed and mode of action. Thi-
azide diuretics cause a moderate increase
in urine production. Loop diuretics 
are fast-acting, powerful drugs. They are
often used as an emergency treatment
for heart failure. Potassium-sparing di-
uretics are used along with thiazide and
loop diuretics, both of which may cause
the body to lose too much potassium.
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors block the
action of the enzyme carbonic anhy-
drase, which affects the amount of
bicarbonate ions in the blood; these
drugs increase urine output moderately
but are effective only for short periods
of time. Osmotic diuretics are used to
maintain urine output following serious
injury or major surgery. 
DIURETIC DRUGS DISODIUM ETIDRONATE
D178
Diuretic drugs may cause chemical
imbalances in the blood. Hypokalaemia
(low blood levels of potassium) is usually
treated with potassium supplements or
potassium-sparing diuretic drugs. A diet
rich in potassium may be helpful. Some
diuretics raise the blood level of uric acid,
increasing the risk of gout. Certain diuret-
ics increase the blood glucose level, which
can cause or worsen diabetes mellitus.
diurnal rhythms A biological pattern
based on a daily cycle; also called circa-
dianrhythms. (See also biorhythms.)
diverticula Small sacs or pouches that
protrude externally from the wall of a
hollow organ (such as the colon). They
are thought to be caused by pressure
forcing the lining of the organ though
areas of weakness in the wall. Their
presence in the walls of the intestines is
characteristic of diverticular disease.
diverticular disease The presence of
small protruding sacs or pouches called
diverticula, in the wall of the intestines,
and the symptoms or complications
caused by them. The term diverticulosis
signifies the presence of diverticula in
the intestine. Diverticulitis is a compli-
cation produced by inflammation in 1
or more diverticula. 
diverticulitis Inflammation of  divertic-
ula in the intestine, particularly in the
colon. It is a form of diverticular disease
and a complication of  diverticulosis.
Diverticula may perforate and abscess-
es may form in the tissue around the
colon, leading to peritonitis. Other com-
plications include intestinal bleeding,
narrowing in the intestine, or a fistula. 
Symptoms include fever, abdominal
pain, vomiting, and rigidity of the abdo-
men. Intestinal haemorrhage may cause
bleeding from the rectum. Diverticulitis
usually subsides with bed rest and anti-
biotics. In severe cases, a liquid diet or
intravenous infusion may be required.
Surgery may be needed, in which case,
the diseased section of the intestine is
usually removed and the remaining sec-
tions are joined together. Some patients
are given a temporary colostomy.
diverticulosis A form of  diverticular
disease  in which there are  diverticula
present in the intestine, particularly in
the colon. Complications of diverticulosis
may include intestinal bleeding and
diverticulitis. The cause is believed to be
lack of adequate dietary fibre (see fibre,
dietary). Diverticulosis is very rare in
developing countries.
Symptoms occur in only 20per cent 
of people with diverticulosis. They usu-
ally result from spasm or cramp of the
intestinal muscle near diverticula. Many
patients have symptoms similar to
those of  irritable bowel syndrome, such
as abdominal pain, a bloated sensation,
and changes in bowel habits. In severe
cases, intestinal haemorrhage may pro-
duce bleeding from the rectum. 
In patients with cramps, a high-fibre
diet, fibre supplements, and  antispas-
modic drugs may relieve the symptoms.
A high-fibre diet also reduces the inci-
dence of complications. Bleeding from
diverticula usually subsides without
treatment, but surgery is an option. 
diving medicine See scuba-diving medi-
cine; decompression sickness.
dizziness A sensation of unsteadiness
and light-headedness. It may be a mild,
brief symptom that occurs by itself, or it
may be part of a more severe, pro-
longed attack of  vertigo with nausea,
vomiting, sweating, or fainting.
Most attacks are harmless and are
caused by a fall in the pressure of blood
to the brain. This can occur when get-
ting up quickly from a sitting or lying
position (called  postural hypotension).
Similar symptoms may result from a
transient ischaemic attack,  in which
there is temporary, partial blockage in
the arteries that supply the brain. Other
causes include tiredness, stress, fever,
anaemia,  heart block,  hypoglycaemia,
and subdural haemorrhage.
Dizziness as part of vertigo is usually
due to a disorder of the inner ear, the
acoustic nerve, or the  brainstem. The
principal disorders of the inner ear that
can cause dizziness and vertigo are
labyrinthitis and M谷ni豕re＊s disease. Dis-
orders of the acoustic nerve, such as
acoustic neuroma, are rare causes of
dizziness and vertigo. Brainstem disor-
ders which can cause dizziness and
vertigo include a type of migraine, brain
tumours, and vertebrobasilar insufficiency.
Brief episodes of mild dizziness usually
DIURNAL RHYTHMS DIZZINESS
Dclear up after taking a few deep breaths
or after resting for a short time. Severe,
prolonged, or recurrent dizziness should
be investigated by a doctor. Treatment
depends on the underlying cause.
DLE Discoid lupus erythematosus.
DMSA scan A type of  kidney imaging
technique (see radionuclide scanning).
DNA The abbreviation for deoxyribo-
nucleic acid, the principal molecule
carrying genetic information in almost
all organisms; the exceptions are cer-
tain viruses that use RNA. DNA is found
in the chromosomes of cells; its double-
helix structure allows the chromosomes
to be copied exactly during the process
of cell division. (See also nucleic acids.)
DNA fingerprinting See  genetic fin-
gerprinting.
dogs, diseases from Infectious or par-
asitic diseases that are acquired from
contact with dogs. They may be caused
by viruses, bacteria, fungi, protozoa,
worms, insects, or mites living in or on a
dog. Many parasites that live on dogs can
be transferred to humans. The most seri-
ous disease from dogs is rabies. The UK
is free of rabies, but travellers to coun-
tries in which rabies exists should treat
anybite with suspicion. Dog bites can
cause serious bleeding and shock and
may  become infected.  Toxocariasis and
hydatid disease are potentially serious
diseases caused by the ingestion of
worm eggs from dogs. In the tropics,
walking barefoot on soil that is contam-
inated with dog faeces  can lead to dog
hookworm infestation. 
179
Bites from dog  fleas are an occasional
nuisance.  Ticks and  mites from dogs,
including a canine version of the scabies
mite, are other common problems. The
fungi that cause tinea infections in dogs
can be caught by humans.
Some people become allergic to ani-
mal  dander (tiny scales from fur or
skin). They may, for example, have asth-
ma or urticaria when a dog is in the
house. (See also zoonoses.)
dominant A term used in  genetics to
describe one of the ways in which a gene
is passed from parent to offspring.  Many
characteristics are determined by a single
pair of genes, 1 of each pair being inherit-
edfrom each parent. A dominant gene
overrides an equivalent  recessive gene.
For example, the gene for brown eye
colour is dominant, so if a child inherits
the gene for brown eyes from 1 parent
and the gene for blue eyes from the other,
he or she will have brown eyes. Some
genetic disorders are determined by a
dominant gene. Examples include Mar-
fan＊s syndrome and Huntington＊s disease.
The child will have the disease if he or she
inherits the gene from 1 or both parents.
domperidone An antiemetic drug used
to relieve nausea and vomiting associ-
ated with some gastrointestinal disorders
or during treatment with certain drugs or
radiotherapy. Adverse effects may in-
clude breast enlargement and secretion
of milk from the breast.
donor A person who provides blood for
transfusion, tissues or organs for trans-
plantation, eggs, or semen for artificial
insemination. The organs most frequently
donated are kidneys, corneas, heart,
lungs, liver, and pancreas. Certain organs
can be donated during a person＊s life-
time; some are only used following brain
death. All donors should be free of can-
cer, serious infection (such as hepatitis
B), and should not carry HIV. Organs for
transplantation must be removed within
a few hours of brain death, and before or
immediately after the heartbeat has
stopped. In some kidney transplants, the
kidney is provided by a living donor,
usually a relative whose body tissues
match well on the basis of tissue-typing.
Suitable related donors may also pro-
vide bone marrow for transplantation
DONOR DLE
D
Chromosome
Gene
DNA helix
DNAand sometimes skin for grafting. (See
also  artificial insemination;  blood dona-
tion;  bone marrow  transplant;  organ
donation; transplant surgery.)
dopa-decarboxylase inhibitors Drugs
used in the treatment of Parkinson's dis-
ease. The 2 main dopa-decarboxylase
inhibitors, co-beneldopa and co-carel-
dopa, are a combination of levodopa and
benserazide and levodopa and carbidopa
respectively. These drugs prevent levo-
dopa from being activated except within
the brain, which reduces the incidence of
side effects such as nausea and vomiting.
dopamine A  neurotransmitter found in
the brain and around some blood ves-
sels. It helps control body movements:
a deficiency of dopamine in the  basal
ganglia (groups of nerve cells deep in
the brain) causes Parkinson＊s disease.
Synthetic dopamine is injected as an
emergency treatment for shock caused
by a myocardial infarction (heart attack)
or  septicaemia (blood infection) and as
a treatment for severe heart failure.
Doppler effect A change in the fre-
quency with which sound waves from a
given source reach an observer when the
source is in rapid motion with respect to
the observer. Approaching sounds appear
higher in pitch (frequency) than sounds
that are moving away. This is because
the wavelengths of the sound from an
approaching source are progressively
foreshortened, whereas the wavelengths
from a receding source are stretched. The
Doppler effect is used in ultrasound scan-
ning techniques. An emitter sends out
pulses of ultrasound (inaudible high-
frequency sound) of a specific frequency.
When these pulses bounce off a moving
object (blood flowing through a blood
vessel, for example), the frequency of the
echoes is changed from that of the emit-
ted sound. A sensor detects the frequency
changes and converts the data into use-
ful information (about how fast the
blood flows, for example). Doppler ultra-
sound techniques are also used to
monitor fetal heartbeat, to detect air bub-
bles in dialysis and heart每lung machines,
and to measure blood pressure.
dorsal Relating to the back, located on or
near the back, or describing the upper-
most part of a body structure when a
180
person is lying face-down. The opposite
of dorsal is ventral.
dose A term used to refer to the amount
of a drug taken at a particular time, or
to the amount of radiation an individual
is exposed to during a session of radio-
therapy. Drug dose can be expressed in
terms of the weight of its active sub-
stance, the volume of liquid to be
drunk, or its effects on body tissues. 
The amount of radiation absorbed by
body tissues during a session of radio-
therapy is expressed in units called
millisieverts (see radiationunits).
dosulepin A tricyclic antidepressant drug
used in the treatment of  depression.
The drug has a sedative action and is
particularly useful in cases of depression
accompanied by  anxiety or  insomnia.
Possible adverse effects include blurred
vision, dizziness, flushing, and rash.
dothiepin Another name for dosulepin.
double-blind A type of  controlled trial
that tests the effectiveness of a treatment
or compares the benefits of different
treatments. In double-blind trials, nei-
ther the patients nor the doctors
assessing the treatments know which
patients are receiving which treatment.
This eliminates any expectations about
which treatment will be most effective.
double vision  Also known as diplopia,
the seeing of 2 instead of1 visual image
of a single object. It is usually a symp-
tom of a squint, especially of paralytic
squint, in which paralysis of 1 or more
of the eye muscles impairs  eye move-
ment. Other causes include a tumour in
the eyelid or a tumour or  blood clot
behind the eye. Double vision can also
occur in  exophthalmos, when the eye-
balls protrude because of an underlying
hormonal disorder. A child with squint
needs treatment to prevent  amblyopia
(lazy eye). In adults double vision needs
immediate investigation.
douche The introduction of water and/or
a cleansing agent into the vagina using a
bag and tubing with a nozzle. Douching
is rarely recommended nowadays. It is
unnecessary for purposes of hygiene
and is an ineffective form of contracep-
tion. It may also introduce infection or
spread an existing vaginal infection into
the uterus or fallopian tubes.
DOPA-DECARBOXYLASE INHIBITORSDOUCHE
D181
Down＊s syndrome A chromosomal ab-
normality resulting in a variable degree
of  learning difficulties and a character-
istic physical appearance.
People with Down＊s syndrome have an
extra chromosome (47 instead of 46).
Affected individuals have 3 copies of
chromosome number 21 instead of 2;
the disorder is also called trisomy 21. In
most cases, it is the result of a sperm or
egg being formed with an extra chromo-
some 21. If one of these takes part in
fertilization, the baby will also have the
extra chromosome. This type of abnor-
mality is more likely if the mother is
aged over 35. A less common cause is 
a chromosomal abnormality known as a
translocation, in which part of 1 parent＊s
own chromosome number 21 has
joined with another chromosome. The
parent is unaffected but has a high risk
of having Down＊s children.
Typical physical features of a person
with Down＊s syndrome include small face
and features; sloping eyes with folds of
skin that cover their inner corners; large
tongue; and short, broad hands. People
with Down＊s syndrome have a greater than
normal risk for certain disorders, such as
a heart defect at birth (see heart disease,
congenital), intestinal atresia (a narrowing
in the intestines), congenital  deafness,
and acute  leukaemia. Down＊s syndrome
children are especially susceptible to
ear infections. A type of Alzheimer's dis-
ease often develops after age 40.
Down＊s syndrome is usually recog-
nized soon after birth. The diagnosis is
confirmed by  chromosome analysis.
Screening tests during early pregnancy,
including  ultrasound scanning, indicate
those fetuses likely to have the syn-
drome. Amniocentesis is then offered.
doxazosin An antihypertensive drug taken
to reduce high blood pressure (see
hypertension). Side effects include dizzi-
ness, headache, and nausea.
doxorubicin An  anticancer drug given
by injection, often with other anticancer
drugs. It is used to treat a variety of can-
cers, including lung cancer. 
doxycycline A tetracycline drug used in
the treatment of chronic prostatitis, pelvic
inflammatory disease, and chest infection
in chronic bronchitis. It is also used to
prevent and treat malaria. Taking the drug
with food reduces possible side effects.
DPT vaccination Also known as triple
vaccine, an injection that provides
immunity against  diphtheria,  pertussis
(whooping cough), and tetanus; The vac-
cine causes the body to produce
antibodies against these infections. It is
givenas a course of 3 injections at 2, 3,
and 4 months, followed by a preschool
booster dose. Before leaving school, a
further diphtheria and tetanus booster
is given. The vaccine does not provide
complete immunity to diphtheria or per-
tussis but reduces risk of serious illness.
Protection against pertussis and tetanus
gradually wanes. In adults, pertussis is
mild but can be transmitted to children.
Since tetanus is serious at any age, boost-
ers are recommended at the timeof any
dirty, penetrating injury if there has not
been a vaccination in the past 10 years.
Reactions to the diphtheria and tetanus
parts of the vaccine are rare. The pertus-
sis vaccine often causes slight fever and
irritability for a day or so. More serious
reactions are extremely rare and include
seizures and an allergic reaction, which
may lead to sudden breathing difficulty
and shock. Permanent damage from the
vaccine is even rarer. Doctors are now
agreed that for most children, the bene-
fits of DPT outweigh the minimal risk
from the vaccine. The pertussis element
of the vaccine should not be given to
children who have reacted severely to a
preceding dose of the vaccine, or who
have a progressing brain abnormality.
drain, surgical An appliance inserted
into a body cavity or wound to release air
or to permit drainage. Drains range from
simple soft rubber tubes that pass from a
body cavity into a dressing to wide-bore
tubes that connect to a collection bag or
bottle. Suction drains are thin tubes with
many small holes to help collect fluid or
air, which is drawn into a vacuum bottle.
dream analysis The interpretation of a
person＊s dreams as part of psychoanalysis
or psychotherapy. First developed by Sig-
mund Freud, it is based on the idea that
repressed feelings and thoughts are re-
vealed, in a disguised manner, in dreams. 
dreaming Mental activity that takes
place during sleep. It is thought to occur
DREAMING DOWN＊S SYNDROME
D182
only during periods of REM (rapid eye
movement) sleep, which last for about
20 minutes and occur 4每5 times a night.
Compared to other phases, the REM
phase of sleep is active. Blood flow and
brain temperature increase, and there
are sudden changes in heart-rate and
blood pressure.
Dreams usually closely mirror the
day＊s preoccupations. Dreaming can be
seen as a process in which the mental
impressions, feelings, and ideas are
sorted out. People roused during REM
sleep report especially vivid dreams.
dressings Protective coverings for wounds
that are used to control  bleeding, abs-
orb secretions, prevent contamination,
or retain moisture.
Dressler＊s syndrome An uncommon
disorder, also known as postinfarction
syndrome, that may occur after a myo-
cardial infarction  (heart attack) or heart
surgery. It is characterized by fever,
chest pain,  pericarditis, and  pleurisy.
Treatment is with  aspirin or, in severe
cases, with corticosteroid drugs. 
dribbling Involuntary leakage of urine
(see  incontinence, urinary) or of saliva
from the mouth (also known as drool-
ing). Dribbling of saliva is normal in
infants. In adults, it may be due to
poorly fitting dentures or may be the
result of facial paralysis,  dementia, or
another disorder of the nervous system,
most commonly  Parkinson＊s disease.
Dribbling of saliva may also be caused
by obstruction to swallowing. 
drip See intravenous infusion.
drop attack A brief disturbance affecting
the nervous system, causing a person to
fall suddenly to the ground without warn-
ing. Unlike in  fainting, the person may
not lose consciousness, but injuries can
occur. Elderly women are the most com-
monly affected. The causes are not fully
understood, but they may be a formof
transient ischaemic attack (TIA) in which
there is a fall in blood flow to nerve cen-
tres in the  brainstem. Elderly men may
havea drop attack while passing urine or
while standing, possibly dueto low
blood pressure or an abrupt alteration
in heart rhythm. Akinetic seizures (a rare
form of  epilepsy) are also sometimes
described as drop attacks. 
There is no treatment for drop attacks
in the elderly. Akinetic seizures respond
to anticonvulsant drugs.
dropsy An outmoded term for general-
ized  oedema (fluid collection in body
tissues). It is not a disease in itself, but
a sign of disease, especially congestive
heart failure or kidney disease. 
drowning Death caused by suffocation
and hypoxia (lack of oxygen) associated
with immersion in a fluid. Most often,
the person inhales liquid into the lungs;
sometimes, no liquid enters the lungs, a
condition called dry drowning (see
drowning, dry). People who are resusci-
tated after prolonged immersion are
said to be victims of ※near drowning§. 
Initially, automatic contraction of a
muscle at the entrance to the windpipe,
a mechanism called the laryngeal reflex,
prevents water from entering the lungs;
instead it enters the oesophagus and
stomach. However, the laryngeal reflex
impairs breathing and can quickly lead
to hypoxia and to loss of conscious-
ness. If the person is buoyant at this
point and floats face-up, his or her
chances of survival are reasonable
because the laryngeal reflex begins to
relax and normal breathing may resume.
An ambulance should be called and the
person＊s medical condition assessed. If
breathing and/or the pulse is  absent,
resuscitative measures should be started
(see artificial respiration; cardiopulmonary
resuscitation) and continued until an am-
bulance or doctor arrives. Victims can
sometimes be resuscitated, despite a
long period immersed in very cold water
(which reduces the body＊s oxygen needs)
and the initial appearance of being dead.
In all cases of successful resuscitation,
the person should be sent to a hospital. 
drowning, dry A form of  drowning in
which no fluid enters the lungs. Some
fatal drowning cases are ※dry§. Victims
have a particularly strong laryngeal reflex,
which diverts water into the stomach
but at the same time impairs breathing.
drowsiness A state of consciousness
between full wakefulness and  sleep or
unconsciousness. Drowsiness is medically
significant if a person fails to awaken
after being shaken, pinched, and shouted
at, or wakes but relapses into drowsiness.
DRESSINGS DROWSINESS
D183
Abnormal drowsiness may be the result
of a  head injury, high fever, meningitis,
uraemia (excess urea in the blood due to
kidney failure), or liver failure. Alcohol or
drugs may also produce this effect. In a
person with diabetes mellitus, drowsiness
may be due to hypoglycaemia or to hyper-
glycaemia. Abnormal drowsiness should
be treated as a medical emergency. 
drug A chemical substance that alters
the function of one or more body organs
or the process of a disease. Drugs
include prescribed medicines, over-the-
counter remedies, and substances
(such as alcohol, tobacco, and drugs of
abuse) that are used for nonmedical
purposes. Drugs normally have a chem-
ical name, an officially approved generic
name (see generic drug), and often a
brand name. Drugs for medical use are
either licensed for prescription by a doc-
tor only or can be bought over the
counter at a chemist＊s or supermarket. 
Most drugs are artificially produced to
ensure a pure preparation with a pre-
dictable potency (strength). Some drugs
are genetically engineered. A drug is
classified according to its chemical
make-up or the disorder it treats or,
according to its specific effect on the
body. All new drugs are tested for their
efficiency and safety. In the UK, drugs
are licensed by the Medicines Control
Agency (MCA). A licence may be with-
drawn if toxic effects are reported or if
the drugs causes serious illness. 
Drugs can be used to relieve physical
or mental symptoms, to replace a de-
ficient natural substance, or to stop the
excessive production of a  hormone or
other body chemical. Some drugs are
given to destroy foreign organisms,
such as bacteria. Others, known as vac-
cines, are given to stimulate the body＊s
immune system to form antibodies. 
Drugs are given by mouth, by injection,
or applied directly to the affected site
via transdermal, nasal, and other direct
routes (for example, to the lungs through
an inhaler). Injected drugs have a more
rapid effect than drugs taken by mouth
because they enter the bloodstream
without passing first through the diges-
tive system. Unabsorbed drugs taken by
mouth are excreted in the faeces. Drugs
that have entered the bloodstream are
eliminated in urine. Some drugs interact
with food or alcohol or other drugs. Most
drugs can produce adverse effects. These
effects may wear off as the body adapts
to the drug. Adverse effects are more
likely if there is a change in the absorp-
tion, breakdown, or elimination of a
drug (caused, for example, by liver dis-
ease). Unexpected reactions sometimes
occur due to a genetic disorder, an
allergic reaction, or the formation of
antibodies that damage tissue. 
Many drugs cross the placenta; some
affect growth and development of the
fetus. Most drugs pass into the breast
milk of a nursing mother, and some will
have adverse effects on the baby. 
drug abuse Use of a drug for a purpose
other than that for which it is normally
prescribed or recommended. Commonly
abused drugs include  stimulant drugs,
such as  cocaine and  amfetamine drugs;
central nervous system depressants,
such as  alcohol and  barbiturate drugs;
hallucinogenic drugs, such as LSD; and
narcotics (see  opioid drugs), such as
heroin. Some drugs are abused in order
to improve performance in sports (see
sports, drugs and; steroids, anabolic).
Problems resulting from drug abuse
may arise from the adverse effects of
the drug, accidents that occur during
intoxication, or from the habit-forming
potential of many drugs, which may
lead to drug dependence. 
drug addiction Physical or psycho-
logical dependence on a drug (see 
drug dependence).
drug dependence The compulsion to
continue taking a drug, either to pro-
duce the desired effects of taking it, or
to prevent the ill-effects that occur when
it is not taken. Drug dependence can be
psychological or physical. A person is
psychologically dependent if he or she
experiences craving or emotional dis-
tress when the drug is withdrawn. In
physical dependence, the body has
adapted to the drug, causing the symp-
toms and signs of withdrawal syndrome
when the drug is stopped. Symptoms
are relieved if the drug is taken again.
Drug dependence develops as a result
of regular or excessive drug use, and it
DRUG DEPENDENCE DRUG
D184
develops most frequently with drugs
that alter mood or behaviour. 
Drug dependence may cause physical
problems, such as lung and heart dis-
ease from smoking and liver disease
from excessive  alcohol consumption.
Mental problems, such as anxiety and
depression, are common during with-
drawal. Dependence may also be linked
with drug tolerance, in which increas-
ingly higher doses of the substance is
needed to produce the desired effect.
Complications, such as  hepatitis or
AIDS, contracted as a result of intro-
ducing infection into the bloodstream
via a dirty needle, may occur. Abusers
may suffer from an overdose because of
confusion about the dosage or because
they take a purer, more potent prepara-
tion than they are used to.
drug interaction  The effect of a  drug
when it is taken in combination with other
drugs or with substances such as alcohol.
drug overdose The taking of an exces-
sive amount of a drug, which may cause
toxic effects (see drug poisoning).
drug poisoning The harmful effects on
the body as a result of an excessive dose
of a drug. Accidental poisoning is most
common in young children. In adults, it
usually occurs in elderly or confused peo-
ple who are unsure about their treatment
and dosage requirements. Accidental
poisoning may also occur during  drug
abuse. Deliberate self-poisoning is usu-
ally a cry for help (see  suicide;  suicide,
attempted). The drugs that are most
commonly taken in overdose include
benzodiazepine drugs and antidepressant
drugs. Anyone who has taken a drug
overdose and any child who has swal-
lowed tablets that belong to someone
else should seek immediate medical
advice. It is important to identify the
drugs that have been taken. Treatment
in hospital may involve washing out the
stomach (see  lavage, gastric). Charcoal
may be given by mouth to reduce the ab-
sorption of the drug from the intestine
into the bloodstream. To eliminate the
drug, urine production may be increased
by an intravenous infusion. Antidotes are
available only for specific drugs. Such
antidotes include  naloxone (for  mor-
phine) and methionine (for paracetamol).
Drug poisoning may cause drowsiness
and breathing difficulty, irregular heart-
beat, and, rarely, cardiac arrest, fits, and
kidney and liver damage.  Antiarrhyth-
mic drugs are given to treat heartbeat
irregularity. Fits are treated with  anti-
convulsants. Blood tests to monitor liver
function and careful monitoring of urine
output are carried out if the drug is
known to damage the liver or kidneys.
dry eye See keratoconjunctivitis sicca. 
dry ice Frozen  carbon dioxide. Carbon
dioxide changes from a gas to a solid
when cooled, without passing through a
liquid phase. Dry ice is sometimes
applied to the skin in cryosurgery, a tech-
nique used, for example, to treat warts. 
dry socket Infection at the site of a
recent tooth extraction, causing pain, bad
breath, and an unpleasant taste. Dry
socket occurs when a blood clot fails to
form in the tooth socket after a difficult
extraction, such as removal of a wisdom
tooth (see impaction, dental). Sometimes,
the clot itself becomes infected, or infec-
tion may already have been present before
extraction. The inflamed socket appears
dry, and exposed bone is often  visible.
The socket is irrigated to remove debris
and may then be coated with an anti-
inflammatory paste. The infection usually
begins to clear up within a few days.
DSM IV The 4th edition of the ※Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders§, published by the American
Psychiatric Association in 1994. It clas-
sifies psychiatric illnesses and is widely
accepted in other countries.
dual personality See multiple person-
ality.
duct A tube or a tube-like passage lead-
ing from a gland to allow the flow of
fluids, for example, the tear ducts. 
dumbness See mutism.
dumping syndrome Symptoms that
include sweating, fainting, and palpita-
tions due to the rapid passage of food
from the stomach into the intestine. It is
uncommon but mainly affects people
who have had a gastrectomy. Symptoms
may occur within about 30 minutes of
eating (early dumping) or after 90每120
minutes (late dumping). Some tense
people may have symptoms although
their stomach is intact.
DRUG INTERACTION DUMPING SYNDROME
D185
Gastric surgery interferes with the nor-
mal mechanism for emptying food from
the stomach (see  digestion). If a meal
rich in carbohydrates is ※dumped§ too
quickly from the stomach, the upper
intestine may swell. This, together with
the excessive amounts of certain hor-
mones released into the bloodstream,
causes the symptoms of early dumping. 
As sugars are absorbed from the intes-
tine, they rapidly increase the blood
glucose level, causing excess  insulin
release. This may in turn later lower the
blood glucose level below normal,
causing the symptoms of late dumping.
A person who has had a gastrectomy
can avoid symptoms by eating frequent,
small dry meals that do not contain
refined carbohydrates. Symptoms may
also be prevented by lying down after a
large meal. Adding guar gum to food is
sometimes effective.
duodenal ulcer A raw area in the wall of
the duodenum, due to erosion of its inner
surface lining. Duodenal ulcers andgas-
tric ulcers (similar areas in the liningof
the stomach) are also called peptic ulcers.
duodenitis Inflammation of the duode-
num (first part of the small intestine),
producing vague gastrointestinal symp-
toms. The condition is diagnosed by
oesophagogastroduodenoscopy (see gas-
troscopy) which is the examination of
the walls of the upper digestive tract
with a flexible viewing instrument. Treat-
ment is similar to that for a duodenal
ulcer (see peptic ulcer). 
duodenum The first part of the small
intestine extending from the pylorus
(the muscular valve at the lower end of
the stomach) to the ligament of Treitz,
which marks the boundary between the
duodenum and the jejunum (the second
part of the small intestine). It is about
25cm long and shaped like a C; it forms
a loop around the head of the pancreas.
Ducts from the pancreas, liver, and gall-
bladder feed into the duodenum through
a small opening. Digestive enzymes in
the pancreatic secretions and chemicals
in the bile are released into the duode-
num through this opening. 
Dupuytren＊s contracture A disorder
of the hand in which one or more fingers
become fixed in a bent position. In about
half the cases, both hands are affected.
In most cases there is no apparent cause,
but the disease may in part be inherited.
Men over 40 are most often affected.
The tissues under the skin in the fingers
or palmbecome thickened and short-
ened, causing difficulty in straightening
the fingers. Surgery can correct deformity
of the fingers, but in some cases there is
a recurrence of the condition.
dura mater The outer of the 3 mem-
branes (meninges) covering the brain.
dust diseases Lung disorders caused by
dust particles inhaled and absorbed into
the lung tissues. There they may cause
fibrosis (formation of scar tissue) and
progressive lung damage. The main
symptoms are a cough and breathing
difficulty. It may take at least 10 years of
exposure to dusts containing coal, sil-
ica, talc, or asbestos before serious lung
damage develops (see pneumoconiosis).
Hypersensitivity to moulds on hay or
grain may lead to allergic alveolitis. Pre-
ventive measures, such as the installation
of dust extraction machinery, have redu-
ced the incidence of dust diseases.
DVT Deep vein thrombosis (see  throm-
bosis, deep vein).
dwarfism See short stature.
dydrogesterone A drug derived from
the female sex hormone  progesterone.
It is used to treat  premenstrual syn-
drome  and menstrual problems (see
menstruation, disorders of). It is also
given together with an  oestrogen drug
as hormone replacement therapy follow-
ing the menopause. Dydrogesterone is
sometimes prescribed for endometriosis
or to prevent miscarriage. Adverse effects
include swollen  ankles, weight gain,
breast tenderness, and nausea.
DYDROGESTERONE DUODENAL ULCER
D
Thickened
tissue under
the skin
DUPUYTREN＊SCONTRACTURE186
dying, care of the Physical and psy-
chological care with the aim of making
the final period of a dying person＊s life as
free from pain, discomfort, and emoti-
onal distress as possible. Carers may
include doctors, nurses, other medical
professionals, counsellors, social work-
ers, clergy, family, and friends. 
Pain can be relieved by regular low
doses of  analgesic drugs. Opioid anal-
gesics, such as morphine, may be given
if pain is severe. Other methods of pain
relief include  nerve blocks,  cordotomy,
and TENS. Nausea and vomiting may be
controlled by drugs. Constipation can
be treated with laxatives. Breathlessness
is another common problem in the dying
and may be relieved by morphine.
Towards the end, the dying person
may be restless and may suffer from
breathing difficulty due to  heart failure
or pneumonia. These symptoms can be
relieved by drugs and by placing the
patient in a more comfortable position.
Emotional care is as important as the
relief of physical symptoms. Many dying
people feel angry or depressed and feel-
ings of guilt or regret are common
responses. Loving, caring support from
family, friends, and others is important. 
Many terminally ill people prefer to
die at home. Few terminally ill patients
require complicated nursing for a pro-
longed period. Care in a hospice may be
offered. Hospices are small units that
have been established specifically to
care for the dying and their families.
dys- A prefix meaning abnormal, diffi-
cult, painful, or faulty, as in dysuria
(pain on passing urine). 
dysarthria A speech disorder caused by
disease or damage to the physical ap-
paratus of speech or to nerves controlling
this apparatus. Affected people can for-
mulate, select, and write out words and
sentences grammatically; the problem is
with vocalexpression only. Dysarthria
is common in many degenerative neu-
rological conditions, such as  multiple
sclerosis and  Parkinson＊s disease. Dys-
arthria may result from a  stroke,  brain
tumour, or an isolated defect or damage
to a particular nerve. Structural defects
of the mouth, as occur in  cleft lip and
palate, can also cause dysarthria. 
Drug or surgical treatment of the under-
lying disease or structural defect may
improve the ability to speak clearly.
Speech therapy is useful.
dyscalculia A disorder in which there is
difficulty in solving mathematical prob-
lems. (See also learningdifficulties.)
dyschondroplasia A rare disorder, also
called multiple enchondromatosis, that
is present from birth and characterized
by the presence of multiple tumours of
cartilaginous tissue within the bones
of a limb. It is caused by a failure of nor-
mal bone development from cartilage.
The bones are shortened, resulting in
deformity. Rarely, a tumour may become
cancerous (see chondrosarcoma).
dysentery An intestinal infection, caus-
ing diarrhoea (often with blood, pus,
and mucus) and abdominal pain. There
are 2 distinct forms:  shigellosis, due to
shigella bacteria; and  amoebic dysen-
tery, caused by the protozoan parasite
ENTAMOEBA HISTOLYTICA. The main risk
with dysentery is dehydration.
dysgraphia Problems with writing (see
learning difficulties).
dyskinesia Abnormal muscular move-
ments. Uncontrollable twitching, jerking,
or writhing movements cannot be sup-
pressed and may affect control of
voluntary movements. The disorder may
involve the whole body or be restricted
to a group of muscles. Types of dyskine-
sia include chorea (jerking movements),
athetosis (writhing),  choreoathetosis (a
combined form),  myoclonus (muscle
spasms),  tics (repetitive fidgets), and
tremors. Dyskinesia may result from
brain damage at birth or may be a side
effect of certain drugs (see tardive dyski-
nesia), which often disappears when the
drug is stopped. Otherwise, dyskinesia is
difficult to treat. (See also parkinsonism.)
dyslexia A reading disability character-
ized by difficulty in coping with written
symbols. It is more common in males,
and evidence suggests that a specific,
sometimes inherited, neurological dis-
order underlies true dyslexia. A child
with dyslexia has normal intelligence.
Thus, his or her attainment of reading
skills lags far behind other scholastic
abilities. While many young children
tend to reverse letters and words (for
DYING, CARE OF THE DYSLEXIA
D187
example, writing or reading p for q or was
for saw), most soon correct such errors.
Dyslexic children continue to confuse
these symbols. Letters are transposed
(as in pest for step) and spelling errors
are common. These children may even
be unable to read words that they can
spell correctly. It is important to recog-
nize the problem early to avoid any
added frustrations. 
Specific remedial teaching can help
the child develop ※tricks§ to overcome
the deficit. Avoidance of pressure from
parents combined with praise for what
the child can do is equally important. 
dysmenorrhoea Pain or discomfort dur-
ing or just before a period. Primary
dysmenorrhoea is common in teenage
girls and young women. It usually starts
2每3 years after menstruation begins but
often diminishes after the age of 25. The
exact cause is unknown. One possibility
is excessive production of, or undue
sensitivity to, prostaglandins, hormone-
like substances that stimulate spasms
in the uterus. Secondary dysmenorrhoea
is due to an underlying disorder, such
as pelvic inflammatory disease or endo-
metriosis, and usually begins in adult life.
Cramp-like pain or discomfort in the
lower abdomen occurs, sometimes with
a dull ache in the lower back. Some
women have nausea and vomiting. Mild
primary dysmenorrhoea is often relieved
by  analgesic drugs. In severe cases,
symptoms can usually be relieved with
oral contraceptives or other hormonal
preparations that suppress ovulation.
Treatment of secondary dysmenorrhoea
depends on the cause.
dyspareunia Painful sexual intercourse
(see intercourse, painful).
dyspepsia The medical term for  indi-
gestion.
dysphagia The medical term for  swal-
lowing difficulty.
dysphasia A disturbance in the ability
to select the words with which to speak
and write and/or to understand speech
or writing. It is caused by damage to
speech and comprehension regions of
the brain. (See also aphasia.) 
dysphonia Defective production of vocal
sounds in speech, as a result of disease
or damage to the larynx (voice-box) or
to the nerve supply to the laryngeal
muscles. (See also  larynx, disorders of;
speech disorders.)
dysplasia Any abnormality of growth.
The term applies to deformities in
structures such as the skull and to
abnormalities of single cells. Abnormal
cell features include the size, shape,
and rate of multiplication of cells.
dyspnoea The medical term for short-
ness of breath (see breathing difficulty).
dysrhythmia, cardiac A medical term
meaning disturbance of heart rhythm,
sometimes used as an alternative to
arrhythmia (see arrhythmia, cardiac).
dystocia A term that means difficult or
abnormal labour (see childbirth). Dysto-
cia may occur, for example, if the baby
is very large, or if the mother＊s pelvis is
abnormally shaped or too small for the
baby to pass through. (See also  child-
birth, complications of.)
dystonia Abnormal muscle rigidity, caus-
ing painful spasms, unusually fixed
postures, or strange movements. Dysto-
nia may affect a localized area of the
body, or may be more generalized. The
most common types of localized dysto-
nia are  torticollis (painful neck spasm)
and scoliosis (abnormal sideways curva-
ture of the spine). Generalized dystonia
may be due to neurological disorders
such as Parkinson＊s disease, or may also
be a side effect of antipsychotic drugs.
Dystonia may be resolved with anti-
cholinergic drugs or with benzodiazepine
drugs. In some cases, biofeedback train-
ing may help. Injections of botulinum
toxin into the affected muscles are effect-
ive in treating some types of dystonia.
dystrophy Any disorder in which the
structure and normal activity of cells
within a tissue have been disrupted by
inadequate nutrition. The usual cause
is poor circulation of blood through the
tissue, but dystrophy can also be due to
nerve damage or deficiency of a specific
enzyme in the tissue. Examples include
muscular dystrophies and  leukodystro-
phies. Corneal dystrophies, in which
cells lining the cornea are damaged, are
a rare cause of blindness.
dysuria The medical term for pain, dis-
comfort, or difficulty in passing urine
(see urination, painful).
DYSURIA DYSMENORRHOEA
D188
ear The organ of hearing and balance. It
consists of three parts: the outer ear,
the middle ear, and the inner ear. 
The outer ear comprises the pinna and
the ear canal. The outer part of the ear
canal produces  earwax, which traps
dust and foreign bodies. The canal is
closed at its inner end by the eardrum,
which vibrates in response to changes
in air pressure that make sound. 
The middle ear is a cavity that con-
ducts sound to the inner ear by means
of three tiny, linked, movable bones
known as  ossicles. The first bone, the
malleus, is joined to the inner surface
of the eardrum. The second, the incus,
is linked to the malleus and to the third
bone, the stapes. The base of the stapes
fills the oval window leading to the
inner ear. The eustachian tube links the
middle ear to the back of the nose. 
The inner ear is an intricate series of
structures deep within the skull. The
front part, the  cochlea, is a tube con-
taining nerve fibres that detect different
sound frequencies. The rear part of the
inner ear contains three semicircular
canals and is concerned with balance.
The semicircular canals are connected
to a cavity called the vestibule and con-
tain hair cells bathed in fluid. Some of
these cells are sensitive to gravity and
acceleration; others detect direction of
movement. Information from the inner
ear is conducted to the brain via the
vestibulocochlear nerve.
earache Pain in the  ear. Earache is a
common symptom, especially in child-
hood. The most frequent cause is acute
otitis media, which results in severe,
stabbing pain. Another common cause
of earache is otitis externa. The pain may
be accompanied by irritation and a dis-
charge of pus. Intermittent earache may
accompany dental problems,  tonsillitis,
throat cancer (see  pharynx, cancer of),
or pain in the jaw or neck muscles.
EAR EARACHE
E
Cartilage
Vestibulo-
cochlear
nerve
Muscle
Cochlea
Malleus
Incus
Stapes
Semicircular
canals
Eustachian
tube
Eardrum
Ear canal
Pinna
Oval
window
EAR
Skull
bone
Cut edge
of cochlea
Outer
ear
Middle earInner ear
PARTS OF EAR
E189
To determine the cause of earache, the
ear is inspected (see  ear, examination
of).  Analgesic drugs  may relieve the
pain, and antibiotic drugs may be given
for infection. Pus in the outer ear may
be removed by suction. Pus in the mid-
dle ear may be drained by  myringotomy.
ear, cauliflower See cauliflower ear.
ear, discharge from An emission of
fluid from the ear, also called otorrhoea.
It may be due to outer-ear infection (see
otitis externa). It may also follow perfo-
ration of the eardrum (see  eardrum,
perforated), usually due to middle-ear
infection (see otitis media). Rarely, after
a  skullfracture,  cerebrospinal fluid or
blood may be discharged.
A swab may be taken of the discharge
and analysed to identify any infection.
Hearing tests may be performed. X-rays
of the skull are taken if there has been a
head injury or serious middle-ear infec-
tion is suspected. Treatment usually
includes antibiotic drugs.
ear, disorders of The  ear is suscepti-
ble to various disorders, some of which
can lead to deafness. In rare cases, the
ear canal, ossicles in the middle ear, or
pinna are absent or deformed at birth.
Rubella in early pregnancy can damage
the baby＊s developing ear, leading to
deafness. Most cases of congenital sen-
sorineural deafness are genetic.
Infection is the most common cause
of ear disorders; it may occur in the ear
canal, leading to otitis externa, or affect
the middle ear, causing  otitis media.
This can lead to perforation of the
eardrum (see eardrum, perforated). Per-
sistent glue ear, often due to infection,
is the most common cause of childhood
hearing difficulties. Viral infection of the
inner ear may cause labyrinthitis.
Cauliflower ear is the result of one
large or several small injuries to the
pinna. Perforation of the eardrum can
result from poking objects into the ear
or loud noise. Prolonged exposure to
loud noise can cause  tinnitus and/or
deafness. Pressure changes associated
with flying or scuba diving can also
cause minor damage (see barotrauma).
Tumours of the ear are rare. Acoustic
neuroma is a noncancerous tumour of
the  acoustic nerve that may press on
structures in the ear to cause deafness,
tinnitus, and problems with balance.
In cholesteatoma, skin cells and debris
collect in the middle ear. Obstruction of
the ear canal is most often the result of
earwax, although in small children, an
object may have been pushed into the
ear (see ear, foreign body in).
In otosclerosis, a hereditary condition,
a bone in the middle ear becomes fixed,
causing deafness.  Meni谷r豕＊s disease is
an uncommon condition in which deaf-
ness,  vertigo, and tinnitus result from
the accumulation of fluid in the inner
ear. Deafness in many elderly people is
due to presbyacusis, in which hair cells
in the cochlea deteriorate.
Certain drugs, such as aminoglycoside
drugs and some  diuretic drugs, can
damage ear function.
eardrum The circular membrane that
separates the outer ear from the middle
ear. The eardrum vibrates in response to
sound waves, conducting the sound to the
inner ear through the ossicles.
eardrum, perforated Rupture or ero-
sion of the eardrum. Perforation of the
eardrum can cause brief, intense pain.
There may be slight bleeding, a dis-
charge from the ear (see ear, discharge
from), and some reduction in hearing. 
Most commonly, perforation occurs as
a result of the build-up of pus in the
middle ear due to acute  otitis media.
Perforation may also be associated with
cholesteatoma. Another cause is injury,
for example from insertion of an object
into the ear, a loud noise, barotrauma,
or a fracture to the base of the skull. 
Diagnosis is confirmed by examina-
tion of the ear (see ear, examination of).
Hearing tests may also be performed.
Analgesic drugs may relieve any pain
and  antibiotic drugs may be prescribed
to treat or prevent infection. Most per-
forations heal quickly. If the perforation
has failed to heal after 6 months,
myringoplasty may be needed.
ear, examination of The ear may be
examined to investigate  earache, dis-
charge from the ear (see ear, discharge
from), hearing loss, a feeling of fullness
in the ear, disturbed balance, tinnitus, or
swelling of lymph nodes (see  glands,
swollen) around the ear. 
EAR, EXAMINATION OF EAR, CAULIFLOWER
E190
To view the ear canal and eardrum, an
otoscope may be used. To obtain images
of the middle and inner ears, X-rays, CT
scanning, or  MRI may be carried out.
Hearing and balance can be assessed
by means of  hearing tests or  caloric
tests.  Electronystagmography assesses
balance by watching eye movements
when water is inserted into the ear.
ear, foreign body in Foreign bodies
can easily enter the ear canal. Children
often insert objects into their ears, and
insects may crawl or fly in. Objects in
the ear must be removed by a doctor.
This can be done by syringingof the ear
or by using fine-toothed forceps. Insects
can sometimes be floated out with olive
oil or lukewarm water.
ear, nose, and throat surgery See
otorhinolaryngology.
ear piercing Making a hole in the ear-
lobe or another part of the external ear
to accommodate an earring. 
ears, pinning back of See otoplasty.
earwax A yellow or brown secretion,
also called cerumen, produced by glands
in the outer ear canal. Some people
produce so much wax that it regularly
obstructs the canal. Excess earwax may
produce a sensation of fullness in the
ear and partial  deafness. Prolonged
blockage may irritate the canal.
Wax that causes blockage or irritation
may come out after being softened with
oil. Otherwise, it should be removed by
a doctor. This is usually done, after wax
is softened, by syringing of the ears. 
eating disorders Illnesses character-
ized by obsessions with weight and
body image. Eating disorders are most
common in young adolescent females
but can affect males. In  anorexia ner-
vosa, patients, despite being painfully
thin, perceive themselves as fat and
starve themselves. Binge-eating follow-
ed by self-induced vomiting is a major
feature of bulimia, although, in this dis-
order, weight may be normal. Both
conditions may occur together. In mor-
bid obesity, there is a constant desire to
eat large quantities of food.
Ebola fever A dangerous and highly
contagious viral infection that causes
severe  haemorrhaging from the skin
and  mucous membranes. Ebola fever
occurs predominantly in Africa. There is
no specific treatment for the disease,
which is fatal in many cases.
ecchymosis The medical term for a
bruise that is visible through the skin.
eccrine gland A type of sweat gland.
ECG The abbreviation for electrocardio-
graphy, a method of recording the
electrical activity of the  heart muscle.
EAR, FOREIGN BODY IN ECG
E
ECG
Technician
Trace
ECG 
machine
Electrode191
An ECG is useful for diagnosing heart
disorders, many of which produce devi-
ations from normal electrical patterns.
Electrodes connected to a recording
machine are placed on the chest, wrists,
and ankles. The machine displays the
electrical activity of the heart on a
screen or as a printed trace. 
echinachea A preparation of the plant
ECHINACEAANGUSTIFOLIA, used in  herbal
medicine. Echinachea is believed to
boost the immune system and therefore
increase the body＊s resistance to bacte-
rial, viral, and fungal infections.
echocardiography A method of ob-
taining an image of the structure and
movement of the heart with ultrasound.
Echocardiography is a major diagnostic
technique used to detect structural, and
some functional, abnormalities of the
heart wall, heart chambers, heart valves,
and large  coronary arteries. It is also
used to diagnose congenital heart dis-
ease (see  heart disease, congenital),
cardiomyopathy,   aneurysms,  pericardi-
tis, and blood clots in the heart.
A transducer (an instrument that
sends out and receives sound signals)
is placed on the chest, or an ultrasound
probe is passed into the oesophagus
using a flexible  endoscope. Ultrasound
waves are reflected differently by each
part of the heart, resulting in a complex
series of echoes, which are viewed on a
screen and can be recorded or the
results printed out. Developments such
as multiple moving transducers and
computer analysis give clear anatomical
pictures of the heart.
Doppler echocardiography measures
the velocity of blood flow through the
heart, allowing assessment of structural
abnormalities, such as septal defects.
echolalia The compulsive repetition of
what is spoken by another person. The
tone and accent of the speaker are
copied as well as the words. Echolalia
may be a symptom of schizophrenia and
sometimes occurs in people with a
learning disability or autism. 
eclampsia A rare, but serious condition
that develops in late pregnancy, during
labour, or after delivery. Eclampsia is
characterized by  hypertension,  protein-
uria,  oedema, and the development of
seizures; it threatens the life of both the
mother and the baby. Eclampsia occurs
as a complication of moderate or severe
(but not mild) pre-eclampsia, 
The warning symptoms of impending
eclampsia include headaches, confu-
sion, blurred or disturbed vision, and
abdominal pain. If untreated, seizures
can then occur and may be followed by
coma. Levels of blood platelets may fall
severely, resulting in bleeding; liver and
kidney function may be affected.
Careful monitoring of blood pressure
and proteinuria throughout pregnancy
ensures prompt treatment of impending
eclampsia. Immediate delivery, often by
caesarian section, together with  antihy-
pertensive and  anticonvulsant drugs is
needed. Patients may need intensive
care to prevent the development of
complications such as kidney failure.
Blood pressure often returns to normal
in the months after delivery, but it may
remain high. There is a risk of recur-
rence in subsequent pregnancies.
econazole An antifungal drug used as a
cream for fungal skin infections (see
athlete＊s foot;  tinea), and in cream or
pessary form to treat vaginal  candidia-
sis. Skin irritation is a rare side effect.
ECT The abbreviation for electroconvul-
sive therapy, in which an electric current
is passed through the brain to induce
seizures in order to treat severe depres-
sion. It is sometimes administered
under a short-lived general anaesthetic.
Temporary  amnesia is a possible side
effect. ECT usually relieves depression
more rapidly than drug treatment and
may be lifesaving in severe depression
that is resistant to other treatments.
Ecstasy An illegal  designer drug, rela-
ted to the  amfetamine drugs. Ecstasy
has a mildly hallucinogenic effect and
generates feelings of euphoria. In most
people, the drug has no ill effects in the
short-term, but repeated use carries a
risk of liver damage. The most common
side-effect is  hyperthermia. Taking the
drug causes intense thirst, and drinking
large quantities of water to combat this
may result in fatal damage to the body,
including brain swelling.
ectasia A term meaning widening, usu-
ally used to refer to a disorder of a duct.
ECTASIA ECHINACHEA
E192
For example, mammary duct ectasia is
abnormal widening of the ducts that
carry secretions from the breast tissue
to the nipple. 
-ectomy A suffix that denotes surgical
removal. For example, tonsillectomy is
surgical removal of the tonsils.
ectoparasite A parasite that lives in or
on its host＊s skin and derives nourish-
ment from the skin or by sucking the
host＊s blood. Various  lice,  ticks,  mites,
and some types of  fungi are occasional
ectoparasites of humans.  
ectopic A term used to describe a body
structure that occurs in an abnormal
location or position, or a body function
that occurs at an abnormal time. 
ectopic heartbeat A contraction of the
heart muscle that is out of normal tim-
ing. An ectopic heartbeat occurs shortly
after a normal beat and is followed by a
longer than usual interval before the
next one. 
Ectopic beats can occur in a heart that
is otherwise normal and may cause no
symptoms. Multiple ectopic beats can
cause  palpitations. After a  myocardial
infarction, multiple ectopic beats are a
sign of damaged heart muscle. Multiple
ectopic beats may lead to ventricular
fibrillation, a rapid uncoordinated heart-
beat that may be fatal. 
Multiple ectopic beats that are caus-
ing palpitations, or that occur after a
myocardial infarction, are often treated
with an  antiarrhythmic drug. (See also
arrhythmia, cardiac.)
ectopic pregnancy A  pregnancy that
develops outside the uterus, most com-
monly in the  fallopian tube, but some-
times in the ovary or in the abdominal
cavity or cervix. As the pregnancy devel-
ops, it may damage surrounding tissue,
causing serious bleeding, which is
potentially life-threatening and requires
emergency treatment.
Ectopic pregnancy is more common in
women who have had previous pelvic
infections (see  pelvicinflammatory dis-
ease) and with some types of IUD and
progestogen-only oral contraceptives.
Most ectopic pregnancies are discov-
ered in the first 2 months, often before
the woman realizes she is pregnant.
Symptoms usually include severe pain
in the lower abdomen and vaginal
bleeding. Internal bleeding may cause
symptoms of  shock, such as  pallor,
sweating, and faintness. 
Diagnosis is made by a transvaginal
ultrasound examination and can be con-
firmed by ectopic  laparoscopy. If the
diagnosis is made early, medical treat-
ment using the drug methotrexate may
be considered. In most  cases, surgery,
usually minimally invasive surgery,  to
remove the pregnancy is carried out. If
blood loss is severe, blood transfusions
are needed. An affected fallopian tube
is removed if it cannot be repaired.
ectropion A turning outwards of the
eyelid so that the inner surface is ex-
posed. Ectropion is most common in
elderly people, in whom it usually
affects the lower lid and is due to weak-
ness of the muscle surrounding the eye.
The condition may also be caused by
the contraction of scar tissue in the skin
near either lid. Ectropion often follows
facial palsy, which causes paralysis of
the muscles around the eye. Even slight
ectropion interferes with the normal
drainage of tears, which may lead to
conjunctivitis. Surgery to tighten the lid
may be needed.
eczema An inflammation of the skin,
usually causing itching and sometimes
scaling or blisters. There are several dif-
ferent types of eczema; some forms are
known as dermatitis.
-ECTOMY ECZEMA
E
Ovary
LOCATION
Uterus
Developing
embryo
ECTOPICPREGNANCY
Fallopian
tube193
Atopic eczema is a chronic, superficial
inflammation that occurs in people with
an inherited tendency towards  allergy.
The condition is common in babies. An
intensely itchy rash occurs, usually on
the face, in the elbow creases, and be-
hind the knees. The skin often scales,
and small red pimples may appear. For
mild cases,  emollients help keep the
skin soft. In severe cases, corticosteroid
ointments may be used.  Antihistamine
drugs may reduce itching. Excluding
certain foods from the diet may be
helpful. Atopic eczema often clears up
on its own as a child grows older. 
Nummular eczema usually occurs in
adults. The cause is unknown. It pro-
duces circular, itchy, scaling patches
anywhere on the skin, similar to those
of  tinea (ringworm). Topical cortico-
steroids may reduce the inflammation,
but the disorder is often persistent.
Hand eczema is usually caused by irri-
tant substances such as detergents, but
may occur for no apparent reason. Itchy
blisters develop, usually on the palms,
and the skin may become scaly and
cracked. Hand eczema usually improves
if emollients are used and cotton gloves
with rubber gloves over them are worn
when coming into contact with irritants.
If the eczema is severe, corticosteroids
may be prescribed.
Stasis eczema occurs in people with
varicose veins. The skin on the legs may
become irritated, inflamed, and discol-
oured. The most important factor is
swelling of the legs, which may be con-
trolled with compression bandages or
stockings. Ointments containing corti-
costeroids may give temporary relief. 
EDD The abbreviation for expected date
of delivery, the date on which a baby is
due to be born. The EDD is calculated
as 40 weeks from the first  day of the
woman＊s last menstrual period (see peri-
od, menstrual). In  practice, babies are
rarely born exactly on their EDD.
edentulous Without teeth. 
EEG The abbreviation for electroenceph-
alography, a method of recording the
activity of the brain. A trace of the activ-
ity is displayed on a monitor or printed
out on a moving strip of paper. In an
EEG, a number of small electrodes are
attached to the scalp and connected to
an instrument that  recordsthe minute
electrical impulses that are produced by
the brain＊s activity. By revealing charac-
teristic wave patterns, an EEG can help
EEG EDD
E
Connection panel 
for electrodes 
Technician
Monitor
displaying
trace
EEG
Recording
electrode
Printed
trace194
in diagnosing different types of epilepsy
and identifying areas in the brain where
abnormal electrical activity develops. 
effusion The process by which fluid
escapes. The term also describes an ab-
normal collection of fluid, such as blood,
pus, or plasma, in the tissues or a body
cavity. An effusion can form as a result
of inflammation or changes in pressure
within blood vessels, or it can be due to
changes in blood constituents, as in
nephrotic syndrome. Effusion commonly
occurs around the lung (pleural effu-
sion) or heart (pericardial effusion) or
within joints, causing swelling.
effusion, joint The accumulation of
fluid in a joint space, causing swelling,
limitation of movement, and usually
pain and tenderness. A joint is enclosed
by a capsule lined with a membrane
called the synovium. The synovium nor-
mally secretes small amounts of fluid to
lubricate the joint, but if it is damaged
or inflamed (for example, by arthritis) it
produces excessive fluid.
Pain and inflammation may be re-
lieved by analgesic drugs,  nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, and injections
of corticosteroid drugs. Swelling usually
reduces with rest, firm bandaging, ice-
packs, and keeping the affected joint
raised. In some cases, the fluid is drawn
out with a needle and syringe. 
egg See ovum. 
ego The conscious sense of oneself,
equivalent to ※I§. In Freudian psychoan-
alytic theory, this part of the personality
maintains a balance between the primi-
tive, unconscious instincts of the id, the
controls of the  superego, and the
demands of the outside world. 
Ehlers每Danlos syndrome An inherit-
ed disorder of  collagen, the most
important structural protein in the
body. Affected individuals have abnor-
mally stretchy, thin skin that bruises
easily. Wounds are slow to heal and
leave paper-thin scars, and the joints
are loose and prone to recurrent dislo-
cation. Sufferers bleed easily from the
gums and digestive tract. Ehlers每Dan-
los syndrome is most often inherited in
an autosomal dominant pattern (see
genetic disorders). There is no known
specific treatment.
Eisenmenger complex A condition in
which deoxygenated blood flows direct-
ly back into the circulation rather than
through the lungs, due to an abnormal
connection between the left and right
sides of the heart and pulmonary hyper-
tension. The resultant  hypoxia causes
cyanosis, fainting, and breathing diffi-
culty. The disorder most often occurs in
people with certain congenital heart
defects (see  heart disease, congenital),
such as ventricular  septal defect, that
have not been corrected.
The diagnosis is confirmed by cardiac
catheterization. Once Eisenmenger com-
plex has developed, surgical correction
of the original defect will not help. Drug
treatment may control symptoms. 
ejaculation Emission of  semen from
the penis at  orgasm. Shortly before
ejaculation, the muscles around the
epididymides (the ducts where sperm
are stored; see epididymis), the prostate
gland, and the seminal vesicles contract
rhythmically, forcing the sperm from the
epididymides to move forwards and mix
with secretions from the seminal vesi-
cles and prostate. At ejaculation, this
fluid is propelled through the  urethra
and out of the body. 
Because both semen and urine leave
the body by the same route, the bladder
neck closes during ejaculation. This not
only prevents ejaculate from going into
the bladder but also stops urine from
contaminating the semen (See also
reproductive system, male.)
ejaculation, disorders of Conditions
in which the normal process or timing
of ejaculation is disrupted. 
In  premature ejaculation, emission of
semen occurs before or almost immedi-
ately following penetration. Premature
ejaculation is the most common sexual
problem in men, and is often due to
over-stimulation or anxiety about sexu-
al performance. If the problem occurs
frequently, sexual counselling and tech-
niques for delaying ejaculation may
help (see sex therapy).
Inhibited ejaculation is a rare condi-
tion in which erection is normal, or even
prolonged, but ejaculation is abnormal-
ly delayed or fails to occur. The problem
may be psychological in origin, in which
EFFUSION EJACULATION, DISORDERS OF
E195
case counselling may help, or it may be
a complication of a disorder such as
diabetes mellitus or alcohol dependence.
In some cases, inhibited ejaculation oc-
curs as a side effect of particular drugs,
such as some antihypertensive and anti-
depressant drugs. 
In retrograde ejaculation, the valve at
the base of the bladder, which normally
closes during ejaculation, stays open.
As a result, ejaculate is forced back into
the bladder. Retrograde ejaculation may
occur as a result of a neurological dis-
ease, after surgery on the bladder or
prostatectomy. There is no treatment,
but intercourse with a full bladder can
sometimes result in normal ejaculation.
(See also  azoospermia;  psychosexual
dysfunction; sexual problems.)
elbow The hinge joint formed where the
lower end of the  humerus meets the
upper ends of the  radius and ulna. The
elbow is stabilized by  ligaments at the
front, back, and sides. It enables the
arm to be bent and straightened, and
the forearm to be rotated through
almost 180 degrees around its long axis
without more than very slight move-
ment of the upper arm. 
Disorders of the elbow include arthri-
tis and injuries to the joint and its
surrounding muscles, tendons, and lig-
aments. Repetitive strain on the tendons
of the muscles of
the forearm, where
they attach to the
elbow, can result
in an inflammation
that is  known as
epicondylitis. There
are 2 principle types
of epicondylitis: ten-
nis elbowand golfer＊s
elbow. Alternatively,
a sprain of the lig-
aments may occur.
Olecranon  bursitis
develops over the
tip of the elbow in
response to local
irritation. Strain on
the joint can produce an  effusion or
traumatic  synovitis. A fall on to the
hand or on to the elbow can cause a
fracture or dislocation. 
elderly, care of the Appropriate care
to help minimize physical and mental
deterioration in the elderly. For exam-
ple, failing vision and hearing are often
regarded as inevitable in old age, but
removal of a  cataract or use of a hear-
ing-aid can often improve quality of life.
Isolation or inactivity leads to  depres-
sion in some elderly people. Attending a
day-care centre can provide social con-
tact and introduce new interests. 
Many elderly people are cared for by
family members. Voluntary agencies
can often provide domestic help to ease
the strain on carers. Sheltered housing
allows independence while providing
assistance when needed. Elderly people
who have dementia or physical disabili-
ty usually require supervision in a
residential care or hospital setting. (See
also geriatric medicine.)
elective A term used to describe a pro-
cedure, usually a surgical operation,
that is not urgent and can be performed
at a scheduled time.
electrical injury Damage to the tis-
sues caused by the passage of an
electric current through the body and by
its associated heat release. The internal
tissues of the body, being moist and
salty, are good conductors of electricity.
Dry skin provides a high resistance to
current flow, but moist skin has a low
resistance and thus allows a substantial
current to flow into the body. Serious
injury or death from domestic voltage
levels is thus more likely to occur in the
presence of water. 
All except the mildest electric shocks
may result in unconsciousness. Alter-
nating current (AC) is more dangerous
than direct current (DC) because it
causes sustained muscle contractions,
which may prevent the victim from let-
ting go of the source of the current. A
current as small as 0.1 of an amp pass-
ing through the heart can cause a fatal
arrhythmia. The same current passing
through the  brainstem may cause the
heart to stop beating and breathing to
cease. Larger currents, generated by
high voltages, may cause charring of tis-
sues, especially where the current
enters and exits the body.
electric shock treatment See ECT.
ELECTRIC SHOCK TREATMENT ELBOW
E
Ulna
Radius
Humerus
ELBOW
Olecranon process196
electrocardiography See ECG.
electrocautery A technique for destroy-
ing tissue by the application of heat
produced by an electric current. Elec-
trocautery can be used to remove skin
blemishes such as warts. (See also cau-
terization; diathermy; electrocoagulation.)
electrocoagulation The use of a high-
frequency electric current to seal blood
vessels by heat and thus stop bleeding.
Electrocoagulation is used in surgery;
the current can be delivered through a
surgical knife, enabling the surgeon to
make bloodless incisions. It is also
used to stop nosebleeds and to destroy
abnormal blood vessel formations, such
as  spider naevi, in which case the cur-
rent is applied through a fine needle. 
electroconvulsive therapy See ECT.
electroencephalography See EEG.
electrolysis Permanent removal of un-
wanted hair by introducing short-wave
electric current into the hair  follicle,
which destroys the hair root. 
electrolyte A substance whose mole-
cules dissociate into its constituent
ions when dissolved or melted.
electromyography See EMG.
electronystagmography A method of
recording the types of  nystagmus in
order to investigate their cause. Electri-
cal changes caused by eye movements
are picked up by electrodes placed near
the eyes and are recorded on a graph.
electrophoresis The movement of
electrically charged particles suspended
in a colloid solution under the influence
of an electric current. The direction, dis-
tance, and rate of movement of the
particles vary according to their size,
shape, and electrical charge. Electro-
phoresis is used to analyse mixtures (to
identify and quantify the proteins in
blood, for example). It may be used as a
diagnostic test for multiple myeloma, a
bone marrow tumour that produces
abnormally high levels of a specific
immunoglobulin in the blood.
elephantiasis A disease that occurs in
the tropics, characterized by massive
swelling of the legs, arms, and scrotum,
with thickening and darkening of the
skin. Most cases of elephantiasis are
due to chronic lymphatic obstruction
caused by filariasis (a worm infestation).
ELISA test A laboratory blood test
commonly used in the diagnosis of
infectious diseases. ELISA stands for
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
(See also immunoassay.) 
elixir A clear, sweetened liquid, often
containing alcohol, that forms the basis
for many liquid medicines, such as
cough remedies.
embolectomy Surgical removal of an
embolus that has blocked an artery (see
embolism). There are two methods:
either an incision is made in the affect-
ed artery and the embolus is removed
by suction, or it is removed by passing a
balloon catheter into the affected vessel.
embolism Blockage of an  artery by an
embolus. Blood clots that have broken
off from a larger clot located elsewhere
in the circulation are the most common
type of embolus. Pulmonary embolism is
usually the result of a fragment break-
ing off from a deep veinthrombosis and
being carried via the heart to block an
artery supplying the lungs; this is a
common cause of sudden death. Blood
clots may form on the heart lining after
a myocardial infarction, or in the atria in
atrial fibrillation, and then travel to the
brain, resulting in a cerebral embolism,
which is an important cause of  stroke.
Air embolism, in which a small artery is
blocked by an air bubble, is rare. Fat
embolism, in which vessels are blocked
by fat globules, is a possible complica-
tion of a major fracture of a limb. 
Symptoms of an embolism depend on
the site of the embolus. Pulmonary
embolism can lead to breathlessness
and chest pains. If the embolus lodges
in the brain, a stroke may occur, affect-
ing speech, vision, or movement. If an
embolism blocks an artery to the leg,
the limb will become painful and turn
white or blue. Untreated, gangrene may
develop. In serious cases of fat em-
bolism, heart and breathing rates rise
dramatically, and there is restlessness,
confusion, and drowsiness.
Embolectomy (surgery to remove the
blockage) may be possible. If surgery is
not possible, thrombolytic and anticoag-
ulant drugs may be given.
embolization The deliberate obstruc-
tion of a blood vessel in order to stop
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY EMBOLIZATION
Epancreas, liver, and gallbladder. A heart
starts to develop in the form of a tube.
Outer layers of the embryo begin to
form the limb buds.
During the 5th week, the external ears
become visible, pits mark the position
of the nose, the jaws form, and the limb
buds extend. Folds of tissue fuse to
form the front wall of the chest and
abdomen. The umbilical cord develops.
During weeks 6每8, the face becomes
recognizably human, the neck forms,
the limbs become jointed, and fingers
and toes appear. After 8 weeks, most of
the internal organs have formed and all
external features are present.
embryology The study of the develop-
ment of the embryo and then the  fetus
from conception until birth. 
emergency Any condition requiring ur-
gent medical treatment, such as cardiac
arrest, or any procedure that must be
performed immediately, such as cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation.
emergency contraception See  con-
traception, emergency.
emesis The medical term for vomiting.
emetic A substance that causes  vomit-
ing, used to treat some types of
poisoning and drug overdose. The most
widely used emetic is ipecacuanha.
EMG The abbreviation for electromyo-
gram, a recording of electrical activity 
in muscle. An EMG can help diagnose
muscle disorders, such as muscular dys-
trophy, or disorders in which the nerve
supply to muscle is impaired, such as
neuropathy or radiculopathy.
197
internal bleeding or to cut off the blood
supply to a  tumour. In the latter case,
the technique can relieve pain; cause
the tumour to shrivel, making surgical
removal easier; or stop the tumour from
spreading. Embolization can also be
used to block flow through vascular
abnormalities such as  haemangiomas
both in the skin and the internal organs.
A  catheter is introduced into a blood
vessel near the one to be blocked and
the embolus that will block the vessel is
released through the catheter. Emboli
are made of materials such as blood-
clotting agents or silicone.
embolus A fragment of material, usual-
ly a blood clot, that travels in the
bloodstream and causes obstruction of
an  artery. An embolus is life-threaten-
ing if it blocks blood flow through a
vital artery (see embolism).
embrocation A medication rubbed into
the skin in order to relieve muscular or
joint pain.
embryo The unborn child during the
first 8 weeks of its development follow-
ing  conception; for the rest of the
pregnancy it is known as a fetus. 
The embryo develops from an egg that
has been fertilized by a sperm (see 
fertilization). It starts as a single cell, but
divides several times as it travels along
the fallopian tube to the uterus to form a
spherical mass of cells. About 6 days
after conception, this mass becomes
embedded in the uterus lining. At the
site of attachment, the outer layer of
cells obtains nourishment from the
woman＊s blood; this part will later
become the placenta. In the cell mass, a
flat disc forms, consisting of layers of
cells from which all the baby＊s tissues
will form. The  amniotic sac develops
around the embryo.
Early in the 3rd week, the head of the
embryo forms and the neural tube,
which will later become the  brain and
spinal cord, forms along the embryo＊s
back. In the 4th week, the neural tube
extends towards the head, where a fold
becomes visible that will eventually
form the brain. Developing ears appear
as pits. Rudimentary eyes form as
stalks. Within the embryo, buds of tis-
sue form that will become the lungs,
EMG EMBOLUS
E
EMBRYO
Limb
buds
Developing
eye
Cardiac
bulge
Umbilical
stalk
Head
bud
20 DAYS 4 WEEKSshortness of breath. Once the damage
to the lungs has occurred, there is no
treatment that can reverse it. Stopping
smoking will reduce the rate at which
the lungs deteriorate.
emphysema, surgical The abnormal
presence of air in tissues under the skin
following surgery or injury. 
empirical treatment Treatment given
because its effectiveness has been ob-
served in previous, similar cases rather
than because there is an understanding
of the nature of the disorder and the
way the treatment works. 
empyema An accumulation of pus in a
body cavity or in certain organs. Empye-
ma can occur around a lung as a rare
complication of an infection such as
pneumonia or pleurisy. The main symp-
toms are chest pain, breathlessness,
and fever. Treatment is by aspiration (re-
moval of the pus by suction) and the
injection of  antibiotic drugs, or by an
operation to open the chest cavity and
drain the pus. Empyema of the gallblad-
der may occur as a complication of
cholecystitis, when it causes abdominal
pain, fever, and jaundice. It is treated by
surgical removal of the gallbladder.
emulsifying ointment A type of emol-
lient containing emulsifying wax, white
Electrical activity is measured during
muscle contraction and at rest; either
small disc electrodes are attached to
the skin over the muscle, or needle
electrodes are inserted into the muscle.
The impulses are displayed on a screen.
EMLA An abbreviation for eutetic mix-
ture of local anaesthetics. This is a
cream that is applied to the skin to
produce local anaesthesia (see  anaes-
thesia, local). EMLA is used to reduce
discomfort before  intravenous injection
and  venepuncture, particularly in chil-
dren, and in skin grafting.
emollient A substance such as lanolin
or petroleum jelly that has a soothing
and softening effect when applied to
the skin, eyes, or  mucous membranes.
Emollients are used in creams, oint-
ments, nasal sprays, and suppositories. 
emotional deprivation Lack of suffi-
cient loving attention and of warm,
trusting relationships during a child＊s
early years, so that normal emotional
development is inhibited. Emotional
deprivation may result if bonding does
not occur in the early months of life.
Emotionally deprived children may be
impulsive, crave attention, be unable to
cope with frustration, and may have im-
paired intellectual development. 
emotional problems A common term
for a range of psychological difficulties,
often related to  anxiety or  depression,
which may have various causes.
empathy The ability to understand and
share the thoughts and feelings of
another person. In  psychoanalysis, the
therapist partly relies on empathy to
establish a relationship with a patient. 
emphysema A disease in which the
walls of the air sacs in the lungs, known
as alveoli (see alveolus, pulmonary), are
progessively destroyed, thus reducing
the area of lung available for exchange
of gases. Emphysema usually develops
along with chronic bronchitis, in a con-
dition known as  chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. In almost all cases,
emphysema is due to smoking. Rarely,
an inherited deficiency of a chemical
known as alpha1-antitrypsin results in
tissue damage, particularly in the lungs
and liver. As the disease progresses,
damage to the alveoli causes increasing
198
EMLA EMULSIFYING OINTMENT
E
NORMALAIR SACS
LOCATION
AIR SACS IN EMPHYSEMA
Small air
spaces
Enlarged
air spaces
EMPHYSEMA199
soft paraffin, and liquid paraffin that is
used to smooth, soothe, and hydrate
the skin in all dry or scaling conditions.
Rarely, ingredients such as preserva-
tives may result in sensitization.
enalapril An ACE inhibitor drug used to
treat hypertension and heart failure. 
enamel, dental The hard outer layer of
a  tooth that covers and protects the
inner structures.
encephalitis Inflammation of the brain,
and sometimes also the meninges, usu-
ally due to a viral infection. Encephalitis
varies in severity from mild, in which
symptoms are barely noticeable, to
serious and potentially life-threatening.
Mild cases can be due to glandular
fever (see  infectious mononucleosis) or
may be a complication of childhood
diseases such as  mumps or  measles.
The most common cause of life-threat-
ening encephalitis is  herpes simplex,
particularly in people with HIV.
Mild cases usually develop over sever-
al days and may cause only a slight
fever and mild headache. In serious
cases, symptoms develop rapidly and
include weakness or  paralysis, speech,
memory, and hearing problems, and
gradual loss of consciousness;  coma
and  seizures may also occur. If the
meninges are inflamed, other symp-
toms may develop, such as a stiff neck
and abnormal sensitivity to light.
Diagnosis is based on results of blood
tests, CT scanning or MRI, EEG, lumbar
puncture, and, rarely, a brain  biopsy.
Encephalitis due to herpes simplex is
treated with  intravenous infusion of the
antiviral drug  aciclovir, but there is 
no known treatment for encephalitis
caused by other viral infections.
encephalitis lethargica An epidemic
form of encephalitis. There have been no
major outbreaks since the 1920s, but
rare sporadic cases still occur. Many
people who survived the initial illness
during the major epidemics developed
post-encephalitic Parkinson＊s disease.
encephalocele A type of  neural tube
defect that results in defects of the
brain rather than of the spinal cord, as
occurs in spina bifida.
encephalomyelitis Inflammation of the
brain and spinal cord, causing damage
to the nervous system. Encephalomyeli-
tis develops as a rare complication of
measles or, less commonly, of other viral
infections such as  chickenpox,  rubella,
or  infectious mononucleosis. Symptoms
include fever, headache, drowsiness,
seizures, partial paralysis or loss of sen-
sation, and, in some cases,  coma.
Diagnosis is as for encephalitis. There is
no cure, but  corticosteroid drugs are
given to reduce inflammation and anti-
convulsant drugs to control seizures.
The disease is often fatal; those who
survive may have permanent damage to
the nervous system. 
Myalgic encephalomyelitis is another
term for chronic fatigue syndrome.
encephalopathy Any disorder affecting
the  brain, especially chronic degenera-
tive conditions.
Wernicke＊s encephalopathy is a degen-
erative condition of the brain caused by
a deficiency of vitamin B1 (see  Wer-
nicke每Korsakoff syndrome).
Hepatic encephalopathy is caused by
the effect on the brain of toxic sub-
stances (see toxin) that have built up in
the blood as a result of  liver failure. It
may lead to impaired consciousness,
memory loss, a change in personality
tremors, and seizures. 
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy,  or
BSE, is a disorder contracted by cattle
after they are given feed containing
material from sheep or cattle. The cause
seems to be an infective agent known
as a  prion. Some cases of new variant
Creutzfeldt每Jakob disease in humans
have been attributed to infection with
the prions responsible for BSE, proba-
bly transmitted in meat products. 
encopresis A type of  soiling in which
children pass normal faeces in unac-
ceptable places after the age at which
bowel control is normally achieved. The
cause of encopresis is usually an under-
lying behavioural problem.
endarterectomy An operation to re-
move the lining of an artery affected by
atherosclerosis, restoring normal blood
flow. Endarterectomy is used to treat
cerebrovascular disease and  peripheral
vascular disease. The procedure can be
performed endoscopically (see  endos-
copy) or by open surgery.
ENDARTERECTOMY ENALAPRIL
E200
New lining grows in the artery within a
few weeks of surgery. When narrowing is
widespread,  arterial reconstructive sur-
gery may have to be performed. 
endemic A term applied to a disease or
disorder that is constantly present in a
particular region or in a specific group
of people. AIDS, for example, is endem-
ic in central Africa. (See also epidemic).
endocarditis Inflammation of the endo-
cardium (the membrane that lines the
inside of the heart), particularly of the
heart valves. Endocarditis is most often
due to  infection with bacteria,  fungi, or
other microorganisms, which may be
introduced into the bloodstream during
surgery or by  intravenous injection with
dirty needles. People whose endocardi-
um has previously been damaged by
disease are particularly vulnerable to
endocarditis, as are intravenous drug
users and people whose immune sys-
tem is suppressed. Endocarditis is also
a rare feature of some types of cancer.
Endocarditis may be either subacute or
acute. In the subacute form, symptoms
are general and nonspecific, although
serious damage may be caused to a
heart valve; the sufferer may complain
of fatigue, feverishness, and vague
aches and pains. On physical examina-
tion, the only evident abnormality may
be a heart murmur. Acute endocarditis,
which occurs less frequently, comes on
suddenly, and causes severe chills, high
fever, shortness of breath, and rapid or
irregular heartbeat. The infection pro-
gresses quickly and may destroy the
heart valves, leading to heart failure. 
Endocarditis is diagnosed by physical
examination and analysis of blood sam-
ples. Tests on the heart may include
ECG,  echocardiography, and  angiogra-
phy. Treatment is with high doses of
antibiotic drugs, which are usually given
intravenously. Heart-valve surgery may
be needed to replace a damaged valve.
endocrine gland A gland that secretes
hormones directly into the bloodstream
rather than through a  duct. Examples
include the thyroid gland, pituitary gland,
ovaries,  testes, and adrenal glands. (See
also exocrine gland.)
endocrine system The collection of
glands around the body that produce
hormones. These glands include the
thyroid gland,  pancreas,  testes,  ovaries,
and adrenal glands. Their hormones are
responsible for numerous bodily pro-
cesses, including growth, metabolism,
sexual development and function, and
response to stress. Any increase or
decrease in the production of a specific
hormone interferes with the process it
controls. To prevent under- or overpro-
duction, hormone secretion from many
endocrine glands is regulated by the
pituitary gland, which is in turn influ-
enced by the hypothalamus in the brain
according to a feedback mechanism. 
endocrinology The study of the  endo-
crine system, including the investigation
and treatment of its disorders.
endodontics The branch of  dentistry
concerned with the causes, prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment of disease and
injury affecting the nerves and pulp in
teeth and periapical tissues in the gum.
Common endodontic procedures are
root-canal treatment and pulpotomy.
endogenous Of a disease or disorder
that arises within the body rather than
being caused by external factors. (See
also exogenous.)
endometrial ablation A treatment for
persistent menorrhagia (heavy menstru-
al blood loss) that involves endoscopic
examination of the  uterus (see  endo-
scopy) and removal of the uterus lining,
the endometrium, by diathermy or laser. 
endometrial cancer See  uterus, can-
cer of.
endometriosis A condition in which
fragments of the endometrium are locat-
ed in other parts of the body, usually in
the pelvic cavity. 
Endometriosis is most common in
women aged 25每40 and may cause 
infertility. The cause of endometriosis is
unclear. In some cases, it is thought to
occur because fragments of the endo-
metrium shed during  menstruation do
not leave the body but instead travel up
the fallopian tubes and into the pelvic
cavity, where they adhere to and grow
on any pelvic organ. These displaced
patches of endometrium continue to
respond to hormones produced in the
menstrual cycle and bleed each month.
This blood cannot, however, escape and
ENDEMIC ENDOMETRIOSIS
E201
causes the formation of cysts, which
may be painful and can grow to a size as
large as a grapefruit. 
The symptoms of endometriosis vary
greatly, with abnormal or heavy men-
strual bleeding being most common.
There may be severe abdominal pain
and/or lower back pain during menstru-
ation. Other possible symptoms include
dyspareunia (see  intercourse, painful),
diarrhoea, constipation, and pain dur-
ing defaecation; in rare cases, there is
bleeding from the rectum. Sometimes,
endometriosis causes no symptoms. 
Laparoscopy confirms the diagnosis.
Drugs (including  danazol,  progestogen
drugs,  gonadorelin analogues, or the
combined  oral contraceptive pill) may
be given to prevent menstruation. In
some cases, local ablation of the en-
dometrial deposit, using either  laser or
electrocautery during laparoscopy, may
be needed. If the woman is not infertile,
pregnancy often results in significant
improvement of the condition. A  hys-
terectomy may be suggested if the
woman does not want children.
endometritis Inflammation of the  en-
dometrium that results from infection.
Endometritis is a feature of  pelvic
inflammatory disease. It may also be a
complication of  abortion or childbirth,
occur after insertion of an  IUD, or be
the result of a sexually transmitted infec-
tion. Symptoms include fever, vaginal
discharge, and lower abdominal pain.
Treatment includes removing any for-
eign body (such as an IUD or retained
placental tissue) and antibiotic drugs.
endometrium The lining of the inside
of the  uterus. The endometrium con-
tains numerous glands and gradually
increases in thickness during the men-
strual cycle (see  menstruation) until
ovulation occurs. The surface layers are
shed during menstruation if conception
does not take place.
endorphins A group of  protein mole-
cules produced in the body that relieve
pain by activating  opiate receptors in
the nervous system. Endorphins have a
similar chemical structure to the pain-
relieving drug  morphine. In addition,
endorphins are thought to be involved
in the body＊s response to stress, as well
as in regulating intestinal contractions,
determining mood, and controlling the
release of certain hormones from the
pituitary gland. (See also enkephalins.)
endoscope A tube-like viewing instru-
ment that is inserted into a body cavity
to investigate or treat disorders. Endo-
scopes can be either flexible or rigid,
depending on the part of the body to be
examined. A flexible  fibre-optic endo-
scope is a bundle of light-transmitting
fibres. At the head, it has an eyepiece,
steering device, and power source; at
the tip, there is a light, a lens, an outlet
for air or water, and sometimes a cam-
era that transmits a picture to a screen.
Side channels enable various surgical
instruments to be passed down the
endoscope. A rigid endoscope is a
straight tube with a light attached. 
endoscopy Examination of a body cavi-
ty for diagnosis or treatment by means
of an endoscope. Endoscopy makes use
of both fibre-optics and video technolo-
gy, and enables almost any hollow
ENDOSCOPY ENDOMETRITIS
E
Power cable
Cable for light source
Eyepiece
Attachment
for water
and/or air
Tip
Instrument
control
Port for
instruments
Tip of endoscope
ENDOSCOPE
RIGIDENDOSCOPE
FLEXIBLEENDOSCOPE
Steering
control
Eye
piece202
structure in the body to be inspected
directly. The endoscope is inserted
through a natural body opening, such
as the mouth or vagina, or into a small
incision. The operator can inspect and
photograph the organ and carry out a
biopsy. Many operations can be per-
formed by passing surgical instruments
down an endoscope. (See also minimal-
ly invasive surgery.)
endothelium The layer of  cells that
lines the heart, blood vessels, and lym-
phatic ducts (see lymphatic system). The
cells are squamous (thin and flat), pro-
viding a smooth surface that aids the
flow of blood and lymph and helps pre-
vent the formation of blood clots. (See
also epithelium.)
endotoxin A  poison produced by cer-
tain  bacteria that is not released until
the bacteria die. Endotoxins that are
released in infected people cause fever.
They also make the capillary walls more
permeable, causing fluid to leak into
the surrounding tissue, sometimes re-
sulting in a drop in blood pressure, a
condition called endotoxic shock. (See
also enterotoxin; exotoxin.)
endotracheal tube A tube that is passed
into the  trachea through the nose or
mouth that enables delivery of oxygen
during artificial  ventilation or of anaes-
thetic gases (see  anaesthesia) during
surgery. An inflatable cuff around the
lower end of the endotracheal tube pre-
vents secretions or stomach contents
from entering the lungs.
enema A procedure in which fluid is
passed into the  rectum through a tube 
inserted into the  anus. An enema may
be given to clear the intestine of faeces,
to relieve constipation or in preparation
for intestinal surgery. Enemas are also
used to administer medicine, such as
corticosteroid drugs to treat  ulcerative
colitis. A barium enema is used to diag-
nose disorders of the large intestine
(see barium X-ray examinations). 
energy The capacity to do work or effect
a physical change. Nutritionists refer to
the fuel content of a food as its energy. 
There are many forms of energy, in-
cluding light, sound, heat, chemical,
electrical, and kinetic, and most of them
play a role in the body. For instance, the
retina converts light energy to electrical
nerve impulses, making vision possible.
Muscles use chemical energy obtained
from food to produce kinetic energy,
movement, and heat.
Energy is measured in units called cal-
ories and joules. Because these units are
extremely small, more practical units used
in dietetics are the kilocalorie (kcal, 1,000
calories), and kilojoule (kJ, 1,000 joules).
Carbohydrates and proteins provide 4 kcal
per gramme (g), fats provide 9 kcal per g
(see metabolism). In general, the energy
liberated from the breakdown of food is
stored as chemical energy in ATP mol-
ecules. The energy in these molecules is
then available for processes that con-
sume energy, such as muscle contraction.
energy requirements The amount of
energy that is needed by a person for
cell metabolism, muscular activity, and
growth. This energy is provided by the
breakdown of  carbohydrates,  fats, and
proteins supplied by food in the diet
and by stored  nutrients in the liver,
muscles, and adiposetissue. 
Energy is needed to maintain the heart-
beat, lung function, and constant body
temperature. The rate at which these
processes use energy is called the basal
metabolic rate (BMR). Any form of move-
ment increases energy expenditure above
the BMR. A person＊s energy require-
ment increases during periods of growth
and during  pregnancy and  lactation.
When more energy is ingested as food
than is used, the surplus is stored and
ENDOTHELIUM ENERGY REQUIREMENTS
E
Endotracheal
tube
Nasal cavity
Epiglottis
Trachea
Lung
ENDOTRACHEALTUBE203
there is usually a gain in weight. When
less energy is consumed than is spent,
weight is usually lost as the stores are
used up. (See also nutrition; obesity.)
enflurane A liquid mixed with  oxygen
and inhaled as a vapour to induce and
help maintain general anaesthesia (see
anaesthesia, general). Rarely, enflurane
may cause arrhythmia.
engagement The descent of the head
of the fetus into the mother＊s pelvis. In a
woman＊s first pregnancy, engagement
usually occurs by the 37th week but in
subsequent pregnancies it may not
occur until labour begins. 
engorgement Overfilling of the breasts
with  milk. Engorgement is common a
few days after childbirth. It causes the
breasts and nipples to become swollen
and tender, and can make breastfeeding
difficult. The problem can be relieved by
expressing milk. 
enkephalins A group of small  protein
molecules produced in the brain and by
nerve endings elsewhere in the body.
Enkephalins have an analgesic effect
and are also thought to affect mood.
Enkephalins are similar to  endorphins
but have a slightly different chemical
composition and are released by differ-
ent nerve endings.
enophthalmos A sinking inwards of the
eyeball. Enophthalmos is most often
caused by fracture of the eye socket or
shrinkage of the eye due to the forma-
tion of scar tissue following injury. 
enteric-coated tablet A tablet whose
surface is covered with a substance that
is resistant to the action of stomach
juices. Enteric-coated tablets pass un-
dissolved through the stomach into the
small intestine, where the covering dis-
solves and the contents are absorbed.
Such tablets are used either when the
drug might harm the stomach lining or
when the stomach juices may affect the
efficacy of the drug. 
enteric fever An alternative name for
typhoid fever or paratyphoid fever.
enteritis Inflammation of the small in-
testine. The inflammation may be the
result of infection, particularly giardiasis
and  tuberculosis, or of Crohn＊s disease.
Enteritis usually causes diarrhoea. (See
also gastroenteritis; colitis.)
enteritis, regional Another name for
Crohn＊s disease.
enterobiasis A medical term for thread-
worm infestation of the intestines.
enterostomy An operation in which a
portion of small or large intestine is
joined to another part of the gastroin-
testinal tract or to the abdominal wall,
for example in a colostomy or ileostomy.
enterotoxin A type of toxin released by
certain bacteria that inflames the intes-
tinal lining, leading to diarrhoea and
vomiting. Enterotoxins cause the symp-
toms of staphylococcal  food poisoning
(see  staphylococcal infections) and
cholera. (See also endotoxin; exotoxin.)
entrapment neuropathy A condition,
such as  carpal tunnel syndrome, in
which local pressure on a nerve causes
muscle pain, numbness, and weakness
in the area that the nerve supplies.
entropion A turning in of the margins
of the  eyelids so that the lashes rub
against the cornea and the conjunctiva.
Entropion is sometimes present from
birth, especially in overweight babies. It
is common in the elderly, due to weak-
ness of the muscles around the lower
eye. Entropion of the upper or lower lid
may be caused by scarring, for example
that due to trachoma.
ENTROPION ENFLURANE
E
BEFOREENGAGEMENT
AFTERENGAGEMENT
Head
Head
sits in
pelvis
Uterus
ENGAGEMENT
Pelvis204
Entropion in babies does not disturb
the eye and usually disappears within a
few months. In later life, entropion can
cause irritation,  conjunctivitis, damage
to the cornea, or problems with vision.
Surgery to correct entropion can pre-
vent such conditions. 
ENT surgery See otorhinolaryngology.
enuresis The medical term for bed-wet-
ting. In most cases, it occurs in children
and affects boys slightly more common-
ly than girls. Usually, enuresis occurs as
a result of slow maturation of nervous
system functions concerned with blad-
der control. It may also result from
psychological stress. In a small number
of bed-wetters, there is a physical
cause, such as a urinary tract infection.
If a child wets the bed persistently,
tests, including  urinalysis, may be per-
formed to rule out a physical cause. For
bed-wetting that is not caused by a dis-
order, treatment starts with training the
child to pass urine regularly during the
day. Getting the child to go to the toilet
just before bed may be helpful. Alarm
systems are available that involve the
placement of humidity-sensitive pads
in the child＊s bed. The child is woken by
the alarm if urine is passed and eventu-
ally learns to wake before urinating.
environmental medicine The study of
the effects on health of natural environ-
mental factors, for example climate,
altitude, sunlight, and the presence of
various minerals. The study of working
environments is a separate discipline
(see occupational medicine.)
enzyme A  protein that regulates the
rate of a chemical reaction in the body.
There are thousands of enzymes, each
with a different chemical structure. It is
this structure that determines the spe-
cific reaction regulated by an enzyme.
Different enzymes occur in different 
tissues, reflecting their specialized func-
tions. In order to function properly,
many enzymes need an additional com-
ponent, known as a coenzyme, which is
often derived from a vitamin or mineral.
Enzyme activity is influenced by many
factors, and can be increased or inhibit-
ed by certain drugs.
Measuring enzyme levels in the blood
can be useful in diagnosing certain dis-
orders. For example, the level of heart
muscle enzymes is raised following a
myocardial infarction because the dam-
aged heart muscle releases enzymes
into the bloodstream. Many different
inherited metabolic disorders, includ-
ing phenylketonuria, galactosaemia, and
G6PD deficiency, are caused by defects
in, or deficiencies of, specific enzymes.
Enzymes can play a valuable role in
treating certain disorders. Pancreatic
enzymes may be given as digestive aids
to people who have malabsorption relat-
ed to pancreatic disease. Enzymes such
as streptokinase and  tissue-plasminogen
activator are used to treat acute  throm-
bosis and embolism. 
eosinophil A type of leukocyte (white
blood cell) that plays a role in the body＊s
allergic responses and in fighting para-
sitic infections. 
ependymoma A rare  brain tumour of
the glioma type that occurs most often
in children.
ephedrine A drug that stimulates the
release of the neurotransmitter  nor-
adrenaline. It is used as a decongestant
drug to treat nasal congestion. 
epicanthic fold A vertical fold of skin
extending from the upper eyelid to the
side of the nose. Epicanthic folds are
common in Oriental people but rare in
other races, except in babies, in whom
they usually disappear as the nose de-
velops. Abnormal epicanthic folds are a
feature of Down＊s syndrome.
epicondyle A bony outgrowth to which
tendons are attached (for example, at
the lower end of the  humerus bone of
the upper arm where it forms part of the
elbow joint). Overuse of muscles, lead-
ing to repeated tugging on the tendons,
can cause pain and inflammation at an
epicondyle (see epicondylitis).
epicondylitis Painful inflammation of
an  epicondyle,  specifically one of the
bony prominences of the  elbow at the
lower end of the humerus. It is due to
overuse of forearm muscles, which
causes repeated tugging on the tendons
attaching to the bone. Epicondylitis
affecting the prominence on the outer
elbow is called  tennis elbow. When the
prominence on the inner elbow is
affected it is called golfer＊s elbow. 
ENT SURGERY EPICONDYLITIS
Educed in the testis, mature as they pass
slowly along the epididymis and are
then stored in the seminal vesicles until
ejaculation takes place. 
Disorders of the epididymis include
epididymo-orchitis and epididymal cysts.
Infection or injury can block the epidi-
dymis, which, if both testes are affected,
may result in infertility.
epididymitis See epididymo-orchitis.
epididymo-orchitis Acute inflamma-
tion of a testis along with its associated
epididymis. Epididymo-orchitis causes
severe pain and swelling at the back of
the testis, and, in severe cases, swelling
and redness of the scrotum. 
The inflammation is caused by infec-
tion. Often, there is no obvious source
of infection, but sometimes the cause is
a bacterial  urinary tract infection that
has spread via the  vas deferens to the
epididymis. Treatment is with antibiotic
drugs. If there is an underlying urinary
tract infection, its cause will be investi-
gated. (See also orchitis.)
epidural anaesthesia A method of
pain relief in which a local anaesthetic
(see  anaesthetic, local) is injected into
the epidural space (the space around
the membranes surrounding the spinal
cord) in the middle and lower back to
numb the nerves that supply the chest
and lower body. Epidural anaesthesia is
used to relieve pain during and after
surgery and during childbirth.
epiglottis The flap of  cartilage lying
behind the tongue and in front of the
205
epidemic A term applied to a disease
that for most of the time is rare in a
community but suddenly spreads rapid-
ly to affect a large number of people.
Epidemics of new strains of  influenza
are common. (See also endemic.)
epidemiology The branch of medicine
concerned with the occurrence and dis-
tribution of disease, including infectious
diseases and noninfectious diseases
such as cancer.
In epidemiological studies, the mem-
bers of a population are counted and
described in terms of such variables as
race, sex, age, social class, occupation,
and marital status. Then the  incidence
and prevalence of the disease of inter-
est are determined. These observations
may be repeated at regular intervals in
order to detect changes over time. The
result is a statistical record that may
reveal links between particular variables
and distribution of disease.
In comparative epidemiological stud-
ies, two or more groups are chosen. For
example, in a study of the link between
smoking and lung cancer, one group
may consist of smokers and the other of
nonsmokers; the proportion with cancer
in each group is calculated.
epidermis The thin outermost layer of
the skin.
epidermolysis bullosa A group of
rare, inherited conditions, varying wide-
ly in severity, in which blisters appear
on the skin after minor injury or occur
spontaneously. The conditions can be
diagnosed by a skin biopsy. There is no
specific treatment. The outlook varies
from gradual improvement in mild
cases to progressive serious disease in
the most severe cases.
epididymal cyst A harmless swelling,
usually painless, that develops in the
epididymis. Small cysts are common in
men over 40 and need no treatment.
Rarely, they become tender or enlarge
and cause discomfort, in which case
surgical removal may be necessary. 
epididymis A long, coiled tube that
runs along the back of the testis and
connects the vasa efferentia (small
tubes leading from the testis) to the vas
deferens (the sperm duct leading to the
urethra). Sperm cells, which are pro-
EPIGLOTTITIS EPIDEMIC
E Urethra
Seminal
vesicle
Bladder
Vas
deferens
EPIDIDYMIS
Penis
Testis
Epididymis
Ureterentrance to the  larynx (voice-box). The
epiglottis is usually upright to allow air
to pass through the larynx and into the
rest of the respiratory system. During
swallowing, it tilts downward to cover
the entrance to the larynx, preventing
food and drink from being inhaled.
epiglottitis A potentially life-threaten-
ing infection causing inflammation and
swelling of the epiglottis. Epiglottitis is
now rare due to routine immunization of
infants against  HAEMOPHILUSINFLUENZAE,
the causative bacterium. 
epilepsy A tendency to have recurrent
seizures. In many people with epilepsy,
the cause is unclear, although a genetic
factor may be involved. In other cases,
seizures may be the result of brain dam-
age from  head injury, birth trauma,
brain infection (such as  meningitis or
encephalitis), brain tumour, stroke, drug
intoxication, or a metabolic disorder. 
Many people with epilepsy do not
have any symptoms between seizures.
Some people experience an aura shortly
before. In some cases, a stimulus such
as a flashing light triggers a seizure.
Epileptic seizures may occur more fre-
quently in times of illness or stress.
Epileptic seizures can be classified in-
to two groups: generalized and partial.
Generalized seizures cause loss of con-
sciousness and may affect all areas of
the brain. There are two types: grand
mal and absence (petit mal) seizures.
During a grand mal seizure, there may
be an aura initially, then the body
206
becomes stiff and consciousness is lost;
breathing may be irregular or may stop
briefly, then the body jerks uncontrol-
lably. The person may be disorientated
for hours afterwards and have no mem-
ory of the event. Prolonged grand mal
seizures are potentially life-threatening.
Absence seizures occur mainly in chil-
dren. Periods of altered consciousness
last for only a few seconds and there are
no abnormal movements of the body.
This type of seizure may occur hundreds
of times daily. 
Partial seizures are caused by abnor-
mal electrical activity in a more limited
area of the brain. They may be simple or
complex. In simple partial seizures, con-
sciousness is not lost and an abnormal
twitching movement, tingling sensa-
tion, or hallucination of smell, vision, or
taste occurs, lasting several minutes. In
complex partial seizures, also known as
temporal lobe epilepsy, conscious con-
tact with the surroundings is lost. The
sufferer becomes dazed and may behave
oddly. Typically, the person remembers
little, if any, of the event.
Diagnosis is made from examination
of the nervous system and an EEG. CT
scanning or MRI of the brain and blood
tests may also be carried out. Anticon-
vulsant drugs usually stop or reduce the
frequency of seizures. Surgery may be
considered if a single area of brain
damage is causing the seizures. Epilep-
sy that develops during childhood may
disappear follow-
ing adolescence.
epiloia See tuber-
ous sclerosis.
epinephrine An
alternative name
for adrenaline.
epiphora See wa-
tering eye. 
epiphysis The end
section of a long
bone (such as the
femur) separated
from the  diaph-
ysis (shaft) by the
epiphyseal plate.
During childhood and adolescence, the
ephiphyseal plate is made of cartilage
but is gradually replaced by bone.
EPILEPSY EPIPHYSIS
E
Epiglottis
Tongue
Larynx
Vocal cords
Trachea
Oesophagus
EPIGLOTTIS
EPIPHYSIS
Diaphysis
ADULTLONGBONE
Epiphysis
Epiphyseal
plateepiphysis, slipped See  femoral epiph-
ysis, slipped.
episcleritis A localized patch of inflam-
mation affecting the outermost layers 
of the sclera (white of the eye) immedi-
ately underneath the  conjunctiva. The
condition usually occurs for no known
reason, mainly affecting middle-aged
men. In some cases, it is a complication
of  rheumatoid arthritis. The inflamma-
tion may cause a dull, aching pain and
there may be photophobia. The disorder
usually disappears by itself in a week or
so but may recur. Symptoms may be
relieved by using eye-drops or ointment
containing a corticosteroid drug.
episiotomy A surgical procedure in
which an incision is made in the  peri-
neum (the tissue between the vagina
and the anus) to facilitate the delivery
of a baby. After delivery, the cut tissues
are stitched back together. Episiotomy
is usually necessary in a forceps delivery
and in a breech delivery.
epispadias A rare congenital abnormal-
ity in which the opening of the urethra
is not in the glans (head) of the penis,
but on its upper surface. In some cases,
the penis also curves upwards. Surgery
is carried out during infancy, using tis-
sue from the foreskin to reconstruct the
urethra. (See also hypospadias.)
epistaxis A medical term for nosebleed. 
epithelium The layer of cells that covers
the entire surface of the body and lines
most of the hollow structures within it.
Epithelial cells vary in shape according
to their function. There are three basic
shapes of cell: squamous (thin and flat),
cuboidal, and columnar. Most internal
organs lined with epithelium are cover-
ed with only one layer of cells, but the
skin, which is subjected to more trau-
ma, consists of many layers. 
epoetin A genetically engineered pre-
paration of the hormone erythropoietin,
which is produced by specialized cells
in the kidneys and stimulates the bone
marrow to make red blood cells. Epoet-
in may be used for treating  anaemia
resulting from the lack of erythropoetin
that occurs in  kidney failure. It is also
used for anaemia occurring in chronic
disorders such as  rheumatoid arthritis
and itching associated with uraemia. 
Epstein每Barr virus A virus that caus-
es  infectiousmononucleosis; the virus is
also associated with Burkitt＊s lymphoma
and cancer of the nasopharynx (see
nasopharynx, cancer of).
ERCP The abbreviation for endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography, an
X-ray procedure used for examining the 
biliary system and the pancreatic duct. 
207
ERCP EPIPHYSIS, SLIPPED
E
Endoscope
X-ray
machine
X-ray
beam
X-ray
monitor
ERCP
monitor
Duodenum
Gallbladder
Endoscope
Pancreas
Endoscope
Common
bile duct
Pancreatic
duct
DETAIL
ROUTEOFENDOSCOPE
Liver
Stomach
Duodenum
ERCPAn  endoscope is passed down the
oesophagus, through the stomach, and
into the duodenum. A catheter is passed
through the endoscope into the com-
mon bile duct and pancreatic duct. A
contrast medium is introduced through
the catheter to make the pancreatic
duct and ducts of the biliary system vis-
ible on X-rays. In some cases, it may be
possible to relieve a blockage due to a
gallstone during the procedure.
erection The hardness, swelling, and
elevation of the  penis that occurs in
response to sexual arousal or physical
stimulation. The erectile tissue of the
penis fills with blood as the blood ves-
sels in it dilate. Muscles around the
vessels contract and stop blood leaving
the penis, so maintaining the erection. 
erection, disorders of Conditions in
which the normal process of erection of
the penis is disrupted. They include
total or partial failure to attain or main-
tain erection (see impotence), persistent
erection in the absence of  sexual desire
(see priapism), and curving of the penis
during erection (see chordee).
ergocalciferol An alternative name for
vitamin D2 (see vitamin D).
ergometer A machine that measures
and records the amount of physical
work done and the body＊s response to 
a controlled amount of exercise. An
ergometer makes continuous record-
ings, both during and after activity, of
heart-rate and rhythm (using an ECG),
blood pressure, rate of breathing, and
volume of oxygen taken in from the air. 
ergometrine A drug given after  child-
birth, miscarriage, or  abortion in order
to reduce loss of blood from the uterus.
It works by causing blood vessels in the
uterine wall to contract.
ergot A product of  CLAVICEPSPURPUREA, 
a  fungus that grows on cereals. Ergot
contains poisonous  alkaloids, some of
which have medicinal properties when
taken in controlled doses. The drugs
ergotamine and  ergometrine are both
produced from ergot. 
ergotamine A drug used in the preven-
tion and treatment of migraine.
erosion, dental Loss of enamel from a
tooth＊s surface due to attack by plaque
acids or other chemicals. Erosion of the
outer surfaces of the front teeth is most
frequently caused by excessive intake of
fruit juices and carbonated drinks. Ero-
sion of the inner surfaces of the molars
may be a result of the regurgitation of
stomach acid, as occurs in people suf-
fering from  acid reflux or  bulimia. (See
also caries, dental.) 
eroticism The character and emotive
nature of sexual excitement. Sexual
arousal may be stimulated by erotic
thoughts, by touching the erogenous
zones, and by a variety of other sensa-
tions (such as the look and feel of
certain clothes). 
eruption The process of breaking out,
as of a skin rash or a new tooth. 
eruption of teeth The process by
which developing  teeth move upwards
through the jawbone and break through
the gum to project into the mouth.
208
ERECTION ERUPTION OF TEETH
E
1st 
molars
(10每14
months)
PRIMARY TEETH: AGES OF ERUPTION
UPPER 
TEETH
UPPER 
TEETH
LOWER
TEETH
LOWER
TEETH
3rd
molars 
(17每21
years)
2nd
molars
(11每13
years)
1st molars 
(6每7 years)
Lateral
incisors (7每8
months)
ERUPTIONOFTEETH
Canines
(16每18
months)
PERMANENT TEETH: AGES OF ERUPTION
Central
incisors 
(6每8 years)
Premolars 
(10每12
years)
Central incisors
(6 months)
2nd
molars 
(2 years)
Lateral incisors
(7每9 years)
Canines
(9每12
years)Deciduous teeth (milk teeth) usually
begin to appear at about 6 months of
age. All 20 deciduous teeth have usually
erupted by 3 years (see teething).
Permanent teeth (also known as sec-
ondary teeth) usually begin to appear at
about 6 years of age. The first perma-
nent molars erupt towards the back of
the mouth and appear in addition to
the deciduous teeth. The eruption of
permanent teeth nearer the front of the
mouth is preceded by reabsorption of
the roots of the deciduous teeth, which
become loose and detach. Eventually,
permanent teeth replace all the decidu-
ous ones. Wisdom teeth (the backmost,
or 3rd, molars) usually erupt between
ages 17 and 21, but, in some people,
they never appear. 
erysipelas An infection, producing  in-
flammation and blistering of the face,
that is associated with a high fever and
malaise. Caused by a streptococcal infec-
tion, erysipelas most often affects young
children and the elderly. Treatment is
with penicillin drugs. (See also cellulitis.)
erythema A term that means redness 
of the skin. Disorders in which skin red-
ness is one feature include  erythema
multiforme,  erythema nodosum,  erythe-
ma ab igne,  lupus erythematosus,  and
erythema infectiosum (also known as
fifth disease). Erythema can have many
causes, including  blushing,  hot flushes,
sunburn, and inflammatory, infective, or
allergic skin conditions such as  acne,
dermatitis,  eczema,  erysipelas,  rosacea,
and urticaria.
erythema ab igne Red, mottled skin
that may also be dry and itchy, caused
by exposure to strong direct heat, such
as when sitting too close to a fire. The
condition is most common in elderly
women. Dryness and itching can often
be relieved by an emollient. The redness
fades in time but may not disappear. 
erythema infectiosum See  fifth dis-
ease.
erythema multiforme Acute  inflam-
mation of the skin, and sometimes of
the  mucous membranes. The disease
can occur as a reaction to certain drugs,
or may accompany viral infections such
as herpes simplex or bacterial infections
such as  streptococcal infections. Other
209
possible causes are pregnancy, vaccina-
tion, and  radiotherapy. Half of all cases
occur for no apparent reason. 
A symmetrical rash of red, often itchy
spots erupts on the limbs and some-
times on the face and the rest of the
body. The spots may blister or form
raised, pale-centred weals, called target
lesions. Those affected may have a
fever, sore throat, headache, and/or
diarrhoea. In a severe form of erythema
multiforme, known as  Stevens每Johnson
syndrome, the mucous membranes of
the mouth, eyes, and genitals are affect-
ed and become ulcerated.
Corticosteroid drugs may be given to
reduce the inflammation. People with
Stevens每Johnson syndrome are also
given  analgesic drugs and may need
intensive care.
erythema nodosum A condition char-
acterized by the eruption of red-purple,
tender swellings on the legs.
The most common cause is a strepto-
coccal infection of the throat, but the
condition is also associated with other
diseases, mainly  tuberculosis and  sar-
coidosis, and may occur as a reaction to
drugs, particularly  sulphonamide drugs,
penicillin drugs, and  salicylate drugs.
Sometimes there is no apparent cause. 
Treatment of any underlying condition
clears the swellings. Bed rest,  anal-
gesics, and, occasionally,  corticosteroid
drugs may be necessary. 
erythrasma A skin infection, caused by
CORYNEBACTERIUM, that affects the groin,
armpits, and the skin between the toes.
Raised, irregularly shaped, discoloured
patches appear in the affected areas.
Erythrasma is more common in people
with  diabetes mellitus. It usually clears
up when treated with erythromycin. 
erythrocyte Another name for a red
blood cell (see blood cells).
erythroderma See  exfoliative dermati-
tis.
erythromycin An  antibiotic drug used
to treat infections of the skin, chest,
throat, and ears. Erythromycin is useful
in the treatment of pertussis and legion-
naires＊ disease. Adverse effects include
nausea, diarrhoea, and an itchy rash. 
eschar A scab on the surface of the skin
formed to cover tissue damage. 
ESCHAR ERYSIPELAS
E210
Escherichia coli (E.coli) A  bacterium
normally found in the intestines which,
if it enters the bladder through the ure-
thra, is a common cause of urinary tract
infections. Types of  E.COLI are often the
cause of traveller＊s diarrhoea, which is
usually a mild illness. However, some
strains of the bacterium can cause seri-
ous food-borne infections that can
result in haemolytic每uraemic syndrome.
Esmarch＊s bandage A broad, rubber
bandage wrapped around the elevated
limb of a patient to force blood out of
the blood vessels towards the heart;
this creates a blood-free area, enabling
surgery to be performed more easily.
esotropia An alternative term for a con-
vergent squint. 
ESR The abbreviation for erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, which is the rate at
which  erythrocytes (red blood cells)
sink to the bottom of a test tube. The
ESR is increased if the level of  fibrino-
gen (a type of protein) in the blood is
raised. Fibrinogen is raised in response
to a range of illnesses, including inflam-
mation, especially when this is caused
by infection or by an  autoimmune dis-
ease. The ESR is also increased if levels
of  immunoglobulins  are very high, as
occurs in  multiple myeloma. ESR is
therefore useful for helping to diagnose
these conditions as well as in monitor-
ing their treatment.
estradiol The most important of the
oestrogen hormones, essential for the
healthy functioning of the female repro-
ductive system and breast development.
In synthetic form, estradiol is used to
treat symptoms and complications of
the  menopause (see  hormone replace-
ment therapy) and to stimulate sexual
development in female hypogonadism.
estriol One of the  oestrogen hormones.
Estriol is the predominant oestrogen
produced during pregnancy. Synthetic
estriol is prescribed to treat symptoms
and complications of the  menopause
(see hormone replacement therapy) and
to stimulate sexual development in
female hypogonadism.
estrone An  oestrogen hormone. A syn-
thetic form is used to treat symptoms
and complications of the menopause
(see hormone replacement therapy).
ESWL Extracorporeal shock wave litho-
tripsy (see lithotripsy).
ethambutol A drug used in conjunction
with other drugs to treat  tuberculosis.
Ethambutol rarely causes side-effects,
although it may occasionally result in
inflammation of the optic nerve, leading
to blurred vision.
ethanol The chemical name for the
alcohol in alcoholic drinks.
ether A colourless liquid that produces
unconsciousness when inhaled. Ether
was the first general anaesthetic. 
ethinylestradiol A synthetic form of
the female sex hormone  estradiol. It is
most often used in  oral contraceptives,
in which it is combined with a progest-
ogen drug. Less frequently, it is used in
hormone replacement therapy.
ethosuximide An  anticonvulsant drug
used to treat absence seizures (petit mal
epilepsy). Ethosuximide may cause nau-
sea and vomiting and, in rare cases,
affects production of blood cells in
bone marrow (see anaemia, aplastic).
ethyl alcohol Another name for  eth-
anol, the alcohol in alcoholic drinks.
ethyl chloride A colourless liquid used
as an analgesic drug. It is applied to the
skin as a spray to numb an area before
minor surgery or to relieve muscle pain.
It is also used to treat  larva migrans, a
hookworm infection.
etidronate sodium See  disodium eti-
dronate. 
etretinate A drug chemically related to
vitamin A, which is used mainly to treat
severe psoriasis. It is occasionally used
in the treatment of other disorders that
cause excessive thickening of the skin,
such as ichthyosis.
Etretinate can cause liver damage and
a rise in blood fats. The drug should not
be taken during pregnancy because of
the risk of damage to the fetus.
eucalyptus oil A substance distilled
from the leaves of eucalyptus trees.
Because of its aromatic smell and
refreshing taste, it is used as a flavour-
ing, and 每 applied as a rub, inhaled as
vapour, or incorporated in tablets 每 is
also used in cough and cold remedies.
There is little evidence that it has any
curative properties, although it may
relieve symptoms.
ESCHERICHIA COLI (E.COLI)EUCALYPTUS OIL
Emore likely to cause a blockage if they
become infected and partly because
children＊s eustachhian tubes are shorter
than those of adults.
euthanasia The use of medical know-
ledge to end a person＊s life painlessly in
order to relieve suffering. Euthanasia is
illegal in the UK. 
euthyroid The term used to describe a
person whose thyroid gland is function-
ing normally, especially someone who
has been successfully treated for either
hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.
evening primrose oil An oil that is
extracted from the seeds of the plant
OENOTHERABIENNIS, commonly known as
the evening primrose. The oil contains
an anti-inflammatory substance called
gamolenic acid, and is believed by
some to be of benefit in treating eczema
and premenstrual syndrome.
eversion A turning outwards. The term
is used medically to describe a type of
ankle injury or deformity in which the
foot is turned outwards.
evidence-based medicine Health care
based on evidence, acquired through
expert practice and research, that a par-
ticular test or treatment is appropriate
for an individual patient.
evoked responses The tracing of elec-
trical activity in the brain in response to
a specific external stimulus. The proce-
dure is similar to that for an EEG. 
The technique is used to check the
functioning of various sensory systems
(such as sight, hearing, or touch). The
information obtained can be used to
reveal abnormalities caused by  inflam-
mation, pressure from a tumour, or other
eunuch A man whose  testes have been
removed or destroyed so that he is ster-
ile and lacks male hormones. A male
who has been castrated before puberty
will have broad hips, narrow shoulders,
and undeveloped male secondary sexu-
al characteristics.
euphoria A state of confident well-
being. Euphoria is a normal reaction to
personal success, but it can also be
induced by drugs, including prolonged
use of  corticosteroid drugs. Euphoria
with no rational cause may be a sign of
mania, or brain damage due to  head
injury, dementia, brain tumours, or mul-
tiple sclerosis.
eustachian tube The passage that runs
from the middleear into the back of the
nose, just above the soft  palate. The
tube acts as a drainage channel from
the middle ear and maintains hearing
by opening periodically to regulate air
pressure. The lower end of the tube
opens during swallowing and yawning,
allowing air to flow up to the middle
ear, equalizing the air pressure on both
sides of the eardrum. 
When a viral infection such as a cold
causes blockage of the eustachian tube,
equalization cannot occur, resulting in
severe pain and temporary impairment
of hearing. A person with a blocked
eustachian tube who is subjected to
rapid pressure changes may suffer from
barotrauma.  Glue ear or chronic  otitis
media may occur if the tube is blocked,
preventing adequate drainage from the
middle ear. These conditions, which
often result in partial hearing loss are
more common in children. This is partly
because their adenoids are larger and
211
EVOKED RESPONSES EUNUCH
E
Inner 
ear
Outer 
ear
Middle
ear
EUSTACHIANTUBE
Eustachian tube Eardrum
EVENINGPRIMROSEOIL
CAPSULES EVENING PRIMROSE 212
disorders, and to help confirm a diag-
nosis of multiple sclerosis. 
Ewing＊s sarcoma A rare malignant
form of bone cancer. It arises in a large
bone, usually the femur, tibia, humerus,
or a pelvic bone, and spreads to other
areas at an early stage. The condition is
most common in children aged 10每15.
An affected bone is painful and tender.
It may also become weakened and frac-
ture easily. Other symptoms include
weight loss, fever, and anaemia. 
The sarcoma is diagnosed by  X-rays
and a  biopsy. If cancer is found, the
whole skeleton is examined by X-rays
and  radionuclide scanning, and the
lungs viewed by CT scanning, to deter-
mine if, and how far, the cancer has
spread. Treatment is with  radiotherapy
and  anticancer drugs. If the cancer has
not spread, the outlook is good. 
examination, physical The part of a
medical consultation in which the doc-
tor looks, feels, and listens to various
parts of the patient＊s body to assess the
patient＊s condition or to gather infor-
mation to help make a diagnosis. 
Most examinations include  palpation,
by which the doctor examines relevant
parts of the body for signs such as
swelling, tenderness, or enlargement of
organs. In some cases, percussion of the
chest, or other parts of the body, may
be performed by tapping with the fin-
gers and then listening to the sound
produced. Auscultation may be used to
listen to blood flow through arteries
and sounds made by the heart and
lungs. The doctor may take the pulse or
blood pressure, examine the eyes and
ears, and assess the strength and coor-
dination of the muscles. 
exchange transfusion A treatment for
haemolytic disease of the newborn, in
which the infant＊s blood is replaced
with rhesus negative donor blood (see
rhesus incompatibility). It is used to
treat dangerously high levels of bilirubin
in the blood and the severe  anaemia
which result from the condition.
excimer laser A  laser used to reshape
the  cornea to correct  myopia (short
sight) or hypermetropia (long sight) by
removing very thin layers of tissue from
the corneal surface (see LASIK; PRK). 
excision Surgical cutting out of dis-
eased tissue, such as a breast lump,
from surrounding healthy tissue.
excoriation Injury to the surface of the
skin or a mucous membrane caused by
physical abrasion, such as scratching. 
excretion Discharge of waste material
from the body, including the by-prod-
ucts of digestion, waste products from
the repair of tissues, and excess water.
The  kidneys excrete excess nitrogen 
in the  urine in the form of urea, along
with excess water, salts, some acids,
and most drugs. The  liver excretes bile,
which contains waste products and bile
pigments formed from the breakdown
of red blood cells. Some of the bile is
passed from the body in the faeces. The
large intestine excretes undigested food,
some salts, and excess water in the
form of faeces. The lungs discharge car-
bon dioxide and water vapour into the
air. Sweat glands excrete salt and water
onto the surface of the skin as a method
of regulating the body＊s temperature.
exenteration The surgical removal of
allorgans and soft tissue in a body cavi-
ty, usually to arrest the growth of a
cancer. It is sometimes used in ophthal-
mology when the eye and the contents
of the eye orbit are removed.
exercise The performance of any physi-
cal activity that improves health or that
is used for recreation or for the correc-
tion of physical injury or deformity (see
physiotherapy). Different types of exer-
cise have different effects on the body.
During aerobic exercise, such as jogging
or swimming, the heart and lungs work
faster and more efficiently to supply the
muscles＊ increased demand for oxygen;
regular aerobic exercise improves the
condition of both the cardiovascular and
respiratory systems. Exercises such as
weight training increase muscle strength
and endurance. Activities such as yoga
and pilates improve flexibility. 
Regular aerobic exercise usually leads
to a reduction in blood pressure. It also
results in an increased amount of high-
density lipoprotein (HDL) in the blood,
which is thought to help protect against
atherosclerosis and  myocardial infarc-
tion. Exercise can relieve the symptoms
of  peripheral vascular disease and of
EWING＊S SARCOMA EXERCISE
E213
some psychological disorders, particu-
larly depression. Regular weightbearing
exercise, such as running, increases the
density of, and thereby strengthens, the
bones. The bone disease osteoporosis is
less common in people who have exer-
cised throughout their adult lives.
However, vigorous exercise may cause
injury and increase the risk of a heart
attack in people who are out of condi-
tion. Professional sportsmen such as
footballers have an increased risk of
osteoarthritis in later life because of re-
peated minor damage to the joints.
exercise ECG The use of electrocardio-
graphy (see ECG) to assess the function
of the heart when it is put under the
stress of exercise. Exercise ECG is usu-
ally carried out when  coronary artery
disease is suspected. It involves raising
the heart rate by exercising, usually on
a treadmill with an adjustable gradient
or an exercise bicycle, and recording the
heart＊s electrical activity for analysis.
exfoliation Flaking off, shedding, or peel-
ing from a surface in scales or thin
layers, as in exfoliative dermatitis.
exfoliative dermatitis A skin disorder
characterized by  inflammation,  redness,
and scaling of the skin over most of the
body. Exfoliative dermatitis may be the
result of an allergic response to a drug
or may be due to worsening of a skin
condition such as  psoriasis or  eczema.
The condition sometimes occurs in lym-
phoma and leukaemia.
There is a widespread rash with severe
flaking of the skin, which results in in-
creased loss of water and protein from
the surface of the body. Protein loss
may cause oedema and muscle wasting.
Further possible complications include
heart failure and infection. The treat-
ment and outlook depend on the cause. 
exhibitionism The habit of deliberately
exposing the genitalia as a deviant sexu-
al act. This type of behaviour is almost
always confined to men. Psychotherapy
or  behaviour therapy may help persis-
tent offenders.
exocrine gland A  gland that secretes
substances through a  duct on to the
inner surface of an organ or the outer
surface of the body. Examples include
the  salivary glands and  sweat glands.
The release of exocrine secretions can
be triggered by a  hormone or a  neuro-
transmitter. (See also endocrine gland.)
exogenous Of a disease or disorder,
having a cause that is external to the
body, such as infection, poisoning, or
injury. (See also endogenous.)
exomphalos A rare  birth defect, in
which a membranous sac containing
part of the intestines protrudes through
the  navel. The condition may some-
times be diagnosed before birth by
ultrasound examination. Exomphalos is
treated by surgery, the success of which
depends on the extent of the defect.
exophthalmos Protrusion of one or
both eyeballs caused by a swelling of
the soft tissue in the eye socket. It is
most commonly associated with  thyro-
toxicosis. Other causes include an  eye
tumour, inflammation, or an  aneurysm
behind the eye. Exophthalmos may re-
strict eye movement and cause  double
vision. In severe cases, increased pres-
sure in the socket may restrict blood
supply to the optic nerve, causing blind-
ness. The eyelids may be unable to
close, and vision may become blurred
due to drying of the cornea.
In exophthalmos due to thyroid dis-
ease, treatment of the thyroid disorder
may relieve the exophthalmos, but, if
the cause is Graves＊ disease, exophthal-
mos may persist even if thyroid function
returns to normal. Early treatment of
the condition usually returns vision to
normal. Occasionally, surgery may be
required to relieve pressure on the eye-
ball and optic nerve. 
exostosis The most common type of
benign  bone tumour,  in which there is
an outgrowth of bone. Exostosis occurs
most frequently at the end of the femur
or tibia. It may be due to hereditary fac-
tors or prolonged pressure on a bone.
In most cases, exostosis produces no
symptoms. Often, it is recognized only
after an injury, when it appears as a
hard swelling. Occasionally, the tumour
presses on a nerve, causing pain or
weakness in the affected area. Diagnosis
can be confirmed by X-rays. Treatment,
by surgical removal, may be carried out
if the tumour is causing symptoms or
for cosmetic reasons.
EXOSTOSIS EXERCISE ECG
E214
exotoxin A poison released by certain
types of bacteria that enters the blood-
stream and causes widespread effects
around the body. Exotoxins are among
the most poisonous substances known.
Infections by  tetanus,  diphtheria, and
some other bacteria that release life-
threatening exotoxins can be prevented
by  immunization. Treatment of such in-
fections usually includes administration
of antibiotic drugs and an antitoxin. (See
also endotoxin; enterotoxin.)
exotropia A term for a divergent squint. 
expectorants Cough remedies that en-
courage the coughing up of sputum. 
expectoration The  coughing up and
spitting out of sputum. 
exploratory surgery Any operation
that is carried out to investigate or ex-
amine part of the body to discover the
extent of known disease or to establish
a diagnosis. Advances in imaging tech-
niques, such as MRI, have reduced the
need for exploratory surgery.
exposure A term used to describe the
effects on the body of being subjected
to very low temperatures, or to a combi-
nation of low temperatures, wetness,
and high winds. The primary danger in
these conditions is hypothermia.
The term is also used to describe sub-
jection to radiation or pollutants.
expressing milk A technique used by
breast-feeding women for removing milk
from the breasts. It may be needed if
the woman＊s breasts are overfull (see
engorgement). A woman may want to
express milk so that it can be given to
the baby in her absence, or so that an
infant unable to feed at the breast, due
to prematurity, for example, can benefit
from breast milk. Milk can be expressed
by hand or with a breast pump.
exstrophy of the bladder A rare birth
defect in which the  bladder is turned
inside out and is open to the outside of
the body through a space in the lower
abdominal wall. Usually, there are also
other defects, such as  epispadias  in
males and failure of the pubic bones to
join at the front. Surgical treatment
involves reconstructing the bladder and
closing the abdominal wall. If the blad-
der is very small, it is removed and the
urine diverted (see urinary diversion).
extraction, dental Removal of teeth by
a dentist. Extraction may be performed
when a tooth is severely decayed or too
badly broken to be repaired, or when 
an abscess (see  abscess, dental) has
formed. Teeth may also be removed if
there is crowding or malocclusion, if the
teeth are loose due to gum disease, or
if they are preventing another tooth
from erupting (see eruption of teeth). 
For most extractions, local anaesthe-
sia is used (see  anaesthesia, dental).
Teeth are usually extracted with dental
forceps, which grasp the root of the
tooth. In difficult extractions, some gum
and bone may also need to be removed
from around the tooth.
extradural haemorrhage Bleeding in-
to the space between the inner surface
of the skull and the external surface of
the  duramater, the outer layer of the
meninges. Extradural haemorrhage usu-
ally results from a blow to the side of
the head that fractures the skull and
ruptures an artery running over the sur-
face of the dura mater. A  haematoma
(collection of clotted blood) forms and
enlarges, causing an increase in pres-
sure inside the skull and resulting in
symptoms several hours or even days
after the injury. Symptoms may include
headache, drowsiness, vomiting, paraly-
sis affecting one side of the body, and
seizures. Untreated, extradural haemor-
rhage may be life-threatening.
CT scanning or MRI confirms the diag-
nosis. Surgical treatment consists of
craniotomy, draining the blood clot, and
clipping the ruptured blood vessel.
extrapyramidal system A network of
nerve pathways that links nerve nuclei
in the surface of the cerebrum, the basal
ganglia, and parts of the brainstem. The
system influences and modifies electri-
cal impulses sent from the brain to
initiate movement in skeletal muscles. 
Damage or degeneration of compo-
nents in the extrapyramidal system 
can disrupt the execution of voluntary
movements and can produce involun-
tary tremors or jerks. Such disturbances
are seen in Huntington＊s disease, Parkin-
son＊s disease, some types of  cerebral
palsy, and can also occur as a side-
effect of phenothiazine drugs.
EXOTOXIN EXTRAPYRAMIDAL SYSTEM
Eextrovert A person whose interests are
constantly directed outwards, to other
people and the environment. Extroverts
are active, sociable, and have many out-
side interests. (See also personality.)
exudation The discharge of fluid from
blood vessels into surrounding tissue. In
most cases, exudation is due to  inflam-
mation. Exudate contains  cells (mainly
white blood cells) and protein.
eye The organ of sight. The eye consists
of structures that focus an image on to
the  retina at the back of the eye and
nerve cells that convert this image into
electrical impulses. These impulses are
carried by the optic nerve to the visual
cortex (an area at the back of the brain
concerned with vision) for interpretation.
The eyes work in conjunction with
each other, under the control of the
brain, aligning themselves on an object
so that a clear image is formed on each
retina. If necessary, the eyes sharpen
images by altering focus in an automat-
ic process called accommodation. 
The eyeballs lie within the bony orbits.
Each eyeball is moved by six delicate
muscles. The eye has a tough outer
coat, the sclera. At the front of the scle-
ra, the transparent cornea serves as the
main ※lens§ of the eye and does most of
the focusing. Behind the cornea is a
chamber of watery fluid, at the back of
which is the  iris with its  pupil, which
appears black. Tiny muscles alter the
size of the pupil in response to changes
in light intensity to control the amount
of light entering the eye. Immediately
behind the iris is the lens, suspended by
fibres from a circular muscle ring called
the  ciliary body. Contraction of the cil-
iary body changes the shape of the lens,
enabling fine focusing. Behind the lens
is the main cavity of the eye, containing
a clear gel, the vitreous humour. On the
inside of the back of the eye is the reti-
na, a complex structure of nerve tissue.
The retina requires a constant supply of
oxygen and glucose, and a network of
blood vessels, the choroid, surrounds it. 
The eyeball is sealed off from the out-
side by a flexible membrane called the
conjunctiva, which is attached to the
skin at the corners of the eye and forms
the inner lining of the lids. The conjunc-
tiva contains tear- and mucus-secreting
glands. They, along with an oily secre-
tion from the meibomian glands in the
lids, provide the tear film that protects
the cornea and conjunctiva. The blink
215
EYE EXTROVERT
E
Bony orbit
Ciliary body
Retinal blood
vessel
Cavity containing
vitreous humour
Retina
Choroid
Cornea
Eye muscle Sclera
Pupil
EYE
Optic
nerve Lens
Iris216
reflex is protective and helps to spread
the tear film evenly over the cornea to
enable clear vision. 
eye, artificial A prosthesis to replace an
eye thathas  been removed. It is worn
for cosmetic reasons. Some movement
of the artificial eye may be achieved by
attaching the muscles that normally
move the eye to the remaining conjunc-
tival membrane (see conjunctiva) or to a
plastic implant in the eye socket.
eye, disorders of Many  eye disorders
are minor, but some can cause loss of
vision unless treated. (See also cornea,
disorders of; retinal detachment.)
Squint is sometimes present at birth.
Rarely, babies are born with  microph-
thalmos. Other congenital disorders that
affect the eye are  nystagmus,  albinism,
and developmental abnormalities of the
cornea and retina.
Conjunctivitis is the most common eye
infection and rarely affects vision.  Tra-
choma or severe bacterial conjunctivitis
can impair vision. Corneal infections
can lead to blurred vision or corneal
perforation if not treated early. Endoph-
thalmitis (infection within the eye) can
occur as a result of eye injury or infec-
tion elsewhere in the body.
Narrowing, blockage or  inflammation
of the blood vessels of the  retina may
cause partial or total loss of vision.
Malignant melanoma of the choroid is
the most common cancerous tumour of
the eye.  Retinoblastoma is a cancerous
tumour of the retina that most com-
monly affects children. 
Various  vitamin deficiencies (particu-
larly of vitamin A) can affect the eye.
This may lead to  xerophthalmia,  night
blindness, or, ultimately, keratomalacia.
Uveitis may be caused by infection or
an  autoimmune disorder such as  anky-
losing spondylitis and sarcoidosis.
Macular degeneration of the retina is
common in the elderly, as is cataract.
Glaucoma, in which the pressure in-
side the eyeball becomes raised, can
lead to permanent loss of vision. In reti-
nal detachment, the retina lifts away
from the underlying layer of the eye.
Ametropia is a general term for any
focusing error, such as  astigmatism,
myopia, or hypermetropia. Presbyopia is
the progressive loss with age of the
ability to focus at close range. Ambly-
opia is often due to squint.
eye-drops Medication in solution used
to treat eye disorders or to aid in diag-
nosis. Examples of drugs given in this
form are  antibiotic drugs,  corticosteroid
drugs,  antihistamine drugs, and drugs
used to dilate or constrict the pupil.
eye, examination of An inspection of
the structures of the eyes, either as part
of a  vision test or to make a diagnosis
when an eye disorder is suspected. 
An eye examination usually begins
with inspection of the external appear-
ance of the eyes, lids, and surrounding
skin. A check of eye movements is usu-
ally performed and the examiner looks
for squint. A check of the visual acuity in
each eye using a  Snellen chart follows.
Refraction testing (using lenses of dif-
ferent strengths) may be performed to
determine what glasses or contact lens-
es, if any, may be needed. A test of the
visual fields may be performed, espe-
cially in suspected cases of glaucoma or
neurological conditions.  Colour vision
may be checked because loss of colour
perception is an indication of certain
disorders of the retina or optic nerve. To
check for abrasions or ulcers, the  con-
junctiva and cornea may be stained with
fluorescein. Applanation  tonometry is
an essential test for glaucoma. 
The  ophthalmoscope is an instrument
used to examine the inside of the eye,
particularly the retina. The slit-lamp
microscope, with its illumination and
lens magnification, allows examination
of the conjunctiva, cornea, front cham-
ber of the eye,  iris, and  lens. For a full
view of the lens and the structures
behind it, the  pupil must be widely
dilated with eye-drops. 
eye, foreign body in Any material on
the surface of the eye or under the lid,
or an object that penetrates the eyeball. 
A foreign body may cause irritation,
redness, increased tear production, and
blepharospasm. In some cases, a foreign
body left in the eye may cause a reac-
tion that results in permanent loss of
sight in both eyes.
Foreign bodies on or in the conjuncti-
va  can usually be flushed out with
EYE, ARTIFICIAL EYE, FOREIGN BODY IN
E217
water. However, medical attention is
needed if the object has penetrated the
eyeball. Dropping the dye  fluorescein
into the eye reveals  corneal abrasions
or sites of penetration. Ultrasound scan-
ning or an X-ray of the eye may also be
performed. Local anaesthetic eye-drops
may be applied and a spatula used to
remove an object from the cornea. The
eye may then be covered with a patch.
Antibiotic drugs may also be prescribed.
eye injuries Serious eye injuries may
be caused either by penetration of the
eye by a foreign body (see  eye, foreign
body in) or by a blow to the eye. 
A blow to the eye may cause tearing of
the  iris or the  sclera, with collapse of
the eyeball and possible blindness.
Lesser injuries may lead to a  vitreous
haemorrhage, hyphaema, retinal detach-
ment, or injury to the trabeculum (the
channel through which fluid drains from
inside the eye), which can lead to 
glaucoma. Injuries to the centre of the
cornea impair vision by causing scar-
ring. Damage to the  lens may cause a
cataract to form.
eyelashes, disorders of The eyelash-
es are arranged in two rows at the front
edge of the lid and normally curve out-
wards. Growth in an abnormal direction
may be due to injury to the lid or, more
commonly, to infection. Severe blephar-
itis may destroy the roots of the lashes.
Trachoma, an infection in which the lid
is distorted by scarring, may lead to
trichiasis. With age, the lashes become
finer and fewer. 
eye, lazy A popular term for amblyopia
or a convergent squint.
eyelid A fold of tissue at the upper or
lower edge of an eye socket. The eyelids
are held in place by  ligaments attached
to the socket＊s bony edges. They consist
of thin plates of fibrous tissue (called
tarsal plates) covered by muscle and a
thin layer of skin. The inner layer is cov-
ered by an extension of the conjunctiva.
Along the edge of each lid are two rows
of eyelashes. Immediately behind the
eyelashes are the openings of the ducts
leading from the meibomian glands,
which secrete the oily part of the tear
film. The lids act as protective shutters,
closing as a reflex action if anything
approaches the eye. They also smear
the tear film across the cornea. 
eyelid, drooping See ptosis.
eyelid surgery See blepharoplasty.
eye, painful red A common combina-
tion of eye symptoms that may be due
to any of several eye disorders. 
Uveitis is a common cause of dull,
aching pain. The redness is caused by
widening of blood vessels around the
iris. Another serious cause of pain and
redness in one eye is acute closed-
angle  glaucoma. Other causes include
keratitis, usually due to a corneal ulcer,
or a foreign body in the eye (see  eye,
foreign body in). The most common
cause of redness and irritation in the
eye is conjunctivitis. 
eye-strain A common term for aching
or discomfort in or around the eye. This
is usually due to a headache caused by
fatigue, tiredness of muscles around
the eye, sinusitis, blepharitis (inflamma-
tion of the eyelids), or conjunctivitis.
eye teeth A common name for canine
teeth.
eye tumours Tumours of the eye are
rare. When eye tumours do occur, they
are usually cancerous and painless.
Retinoblastoma is a cancerous tumour
of the retina that occurs in one or both
eyes and most often affects children. It
may be treated by  radiotherapy,  laser
treatment, or  cryosurgery, but the eye
may have to be removed to prevent
spread of the tumour.
Malignant melanoma is a cancer of the
choroid. It usually affects older people.
There are no symptoms in the early
stages, but it eventually causes  retinal
detachment and distortion of vision.
Small tumours can be treated by laser,
but the eye may need to be removed to
avoid spread of the tumour. 
Secondary eye tumours occur when
cancer elsewhere in the body spreads to
the eye. Symptoms depend on the tu-
mour＊s location and growth rate. It may
be controlled by radiotherapy. 
Basal cell carcinoma is the most com-
mon type of tumour affecting the eyelid.
It usually has a crusty central crater 
and a rolled edge. In the early stages,
treatment may be possible by surgery,
radiotherapy, or cryosurgery. 
EYE TUMOURS EYE INJURIES
Eface-lift A cosmetic operation to smooth
out wrinkles and lift sagging skin on an
aging face. The effect is achieved by lift-
ing the skin off the face and removing
the excess. The skin is then stitched
back together within the hairline. The
effect usually lasts about 5 years. 
facet joint A type of joint found in the
spine, formed by the bony knob (called
a process) of one vertebra fitting into a
hollow in the vertebra above. Facet joints
allow a degree of movement between
individual vertebrae, which gives the
spine its flexibility.
facial nerve The 7th cranial nerve, which
arises from structures in the brainstem
and sends branches to the face, neck,
salivary glands, and outer ear. 
The facial nerve performs both motor
and sensory functions. It controls the
muscles of the neck and of facial expres-
sion, stimulatesthe secretion of saliva,
and conveys sensory  information from
the tongue and from the outer ear.
Damage to the nerve causes weakness
of the facial muscles (see  facial palsy)
and, in some cases, loss of taste. Such
damage is most often due to a viral
infection but may also occur in stroke. 
218
facial pain Pain in the face may be due
to a variety of causes, of which injury is
the most obvious. Facial pain is also
commonly due to infection, particularly
in  sinusitis and mumps. Problems with
the teeth and jaws are another common
cause of facial pain. They include severe
caries (see  caries, dental), an abscess
(see abscess, dental), impacted wisdom
teeth (see  impaction, dental), or partial
dislocation of the jaw (see  jaw, dislo-
cated). Damage to a nerve that supplies
the face can produce severe pain,
including the knife-like pain that pre-
cedes the one-sided rash in  herpes
zoster and the intermittent shooting
pain of trigeminal neuralgia.
A disorder elsewhere in the body may
result in  referred pain in the face. For
example, in angina, pain may be felt in
the jaw. In migraine, pain may occur on
one side of the face. Facial pain that
occurs for no apparent reason may be a
symptom of depression.
Analgesic drugs can provide tempor-
ary relief, but severe or persistent facial
pain requires medical attention. 
facial palsy Weakness of the facial
muscles due to inflammation of or dam-
age to the facial nerve. The condition is
usually temporary and affects only one
side of the face.
Facial palsy is most often due to Bell＊s
palsy, which occurs for no known reason.
Less commonly, facial palsy is associated
with herpes zoster affecting the ear and
facial nerve. Facial palsy may also result
from surgical damage to this nerve or
compression of the nerve by a tumour.
Facial palsy usually comes on suddenly.
The eyelid and corner of the mouth
droop on one side
ofthe face and
theremay be pain
in theear on  that
side. The sense of
taste may beim-
paired or sounds
may seem to be
unnaturally loud.
In many cases,
facial palsy clears
up without treat-
ment. Pain can be
relieved by taking
FACE-LIFT FACIAL PALSY
F
Optic nerve
Facial nerve
Spinal cord
Brain
FACIALNERVE
Skull
FACIAL PALSY
F219
analgesic drugs, and exercising the facial
muscles may aid recovery. In some cases,
it may be necessary to tape the eyelid
shut at bedtime in order to avoid the
risk of corneal abrasion. Bell＊s palsy may
be treated with  corticosteroid drugs  to
reduce inflammation and speed recov-
ery. Re-routing or grafting of nerve tissue
may help people with palsies as a result
of injury or a tumour.
facial spasm An uncommon disorder 
in which there is frequent twitching of
facial muscles, which are supplied by the
facial nerve. Facial spasm affects pre-
dominantly middle-aged women and is
of unknown cause.
factitious disorders A group of disor-
ders in which a patient＊s symptoms
mimic those of a true illness but which
have been invented by, and are control-
led by, the patient. There is no apparent
cause for a factitious disorder other
than a wish for attention. The most
common disorder of this type, Munch-
ausen＊s syndrome, is characterized by
physical symptoms. In a second form,
Ganser＊s syndrome, there are psycholo-
gical symptoms. These disorders differ
from malingering, in which the person
claims to be ill for a particular purpose,
such as obtaining time off work.
factor V One of the blood proteins that
maintains the balance between the
blood clotting too easily or too slowly
after an injury. About 5 per cent of the
population have an inherited mutation
in the gene controlling factor V produc-
tion, known as factor V Leiden. They are
at increased risk of deep-vein  thrombo-
sis (see  thrombophilia), particularly if
they are taking the oral contraceptive
pill or go on long aircraft journeys.
factor VIII One of the blood proteins
involved in  blood clotting. People with
haemophilia have a reduced level of 
factor VIII in their blood and, conse-
quently, have a tendency to abnormal
and prolonged bleeding when injured.
factor IX A protein in blood that plays
an important role in the clotting mecha-
nism. A deficiency of factor IX causes a
rare genetic bleeding disorder known as
Christmas disease.
faecal impaction A condition in which
a large mass of hard  faeces cannot be
evacuated from the rectum. It is usually
associated with long-standing constipa-
tion. Faecal impaction is most common
in very young children and in the elder-
ly, especially those who are bedridden.
The main symptoms are an intense
desire to pass a bowel movement; pain
in the rectum, anus, and centre of the
abdomen; and, in some cases, watery
faeces that are passed around the mass.
Treatment is with enemas or by manual
removal of the faecal mass. 
faecalith A small, hard piece of impac-
ted faeces that forms in a sac in the 
wall of the intestine. A faecalith is
harmless unless it blocks the entrance
to the sac, causing  diverticulitis,  or to
the appendix, causing appendicitis. 
faeces Waste material from the diges-
tive tract that is expelled through the
anus. Solidified in the large intestine,
faeces are composed of indigestible food
residue (dietary  fibre), dead bacteria,
dead cells from the tract lining, intesti-
nal secretions, bile (which makes faeces
brown), and water.
faeces, abnormal Faeces that differ
from normal in colour, odour, consis-
tency, or content. Abnormal faeces may
indicate a disorder of the digestive sys-
tem or related organ, such as the  liver,
but a change in the character of faeces
is most often due to a change in diet.
Diarrhoea may be due simply to anxi-
ety or may be caused by an intestinal
infection (see gastroenteritis); by an in-
testinal disorder such as ulcerative colitis
or Crohn＊s disease; or by  irritable bowel
syndrome. Loose stools may indicate
malabsorption. Constipation is generally
harmless but, if it develops unexpected-
ly, may be caused by a large-intestine
disorder such as colon cancer.
Pale faeces may be caused by diar-
rhoea, a lack of bile in the intestine as a
result of bile duct obstruction, or a dis-
ease that causes malabsorption (such
as coeliac disease). Such faeces may be
oily, foul-smelling, and difficult to flush
away. Dark faeces may result from tak-
ing iron tablets. However, if faeces are
black, there may be bleeding in the
upper digestive tract.
Faeces containing excessive mucus are
sometimes associated with constipation
FAECES, ABNORMAL FACIAL SPASM
Fbrain is restored. This restoration usu-
ally happens within minutes becausethe
loss of consciousness results in the per-
son falling into a lying position, which
restores the flow of blood to the brain.
Medical attention should be sought for
prolonged unconsciousness or repeated
attacks of fainting.
faith-healing The supposed ability of
certain people to cure disease by a
healing force inexplicable to science. 
falciparum malaria The most severe
form of malaria, caused by the parasitic
protozoan PLASMODIUM FALCIPARUM.
fallen arches A cause of flat-feet. Fallen
arches can develop as a result of weak-
ness of the muscles that support the
arches of the foot.
fallopian tube One of the 2 tubes that
extend from the uterus to the ovary. The
fallopian tube transports eggs and sperm
and is where fertilization takes place.
The tube opens into the uterus at one
end, and the other end, which is divided
into fimbriae (finger-like projections),
lies close to the ovary. The tube has
muscular walls lined by cells with cilia
(hair-like projections). The fimbriae take
up the egg after it is expelled from the
ovary. The beating cilia and muscular
contractions propel the egg towards the
uterus. After intercourse, sperm swim
up the fallopian tube from the uterus.
The lining of the tube and its secretions
220
or irritable bowel syndrome.  Enteritis,
dysentery, or a tumour of the intestine
(see  intestine, tumours of) may result in
excess mucus, which is often accom-
panied by blood. 
Blood in the faeces differs in appear-
ance depending on the site of bleeding.
Bleeding from the stomach or duode-
num is usually passed in the form of
black, tarry faeces. Blood from the colon
is red and is usually passed at the same
time as the faeces. Bleeding from the
rectum or anus, which may be due to
tumours or to haemorrhoids, is usually
bright red. (See also rectal bleeding.)
faeces, blood in the See faeces, abnor-
mal; rectal bleeding.
Fahrenheit scale A temperature scale
in which the melting point of ice is 32o
and the boiling point of water is 212o.
On this scale, normal body temperature
is 98.4oF, which is the equivalent of 37o
Celsius (C). To convert a Fahrenheit tem-
perature to Celsius, subtract 32 and
multiply by 0.56 (or 5/9). To convert a
Celsius temperature to Fahrenheit, mul-
tiply by 1.8 (or 9/5) then add 32. (See
also Celsius scale.)
failure to thrive Failure of expected
growth in an infant or toddler, usually
assessed by comparing the rate at
which a baby gains weight with a stan-
dardized growth chart. An undiagnosed
illness such as a urinary infection may
be the cause. Emotional or physical
deprivation can also cause failure to
thrive. A child who fails to grow at the
appropriate rate needs tests to deter-
mine the cause.
fainting Temporary loss of conscious-
ness due to reduced blood flow to the
brain. Episodes of fainting are usually
preceded by sweating, nausea, dizzi-
ness, and weakness, and are commonly
caused by pain, stress, shock, a stuffy
atmosphere, or prolonged coughing. An
episode may also result from postural
hypotension, which may occur when a
person stands still for a long time or
suddenly stands up. This is common in
the elderly, in people with diabetes mel-
litus, and in those on  antihypertensive
drugs or vasodilator drugs.
In most cases, recovery from fainting
occurs when normal blood flow to the
FAECES, BLOOD IN THE FALLOPIAN TUBE
F
Fallopian
tube
Ovary
Uterus
LOCATION
Cervix
FALLOPIANTUBE
Fimbriae
Vagina221
sustain the egg and sperm, encouraging
fertilization, and nourish the egg until it
reaches the uterus.
Salpingitis is inflammation of the fal-
lopian tube, usually the result of a
sexually transmitted bacterial infection,
that can lead to  infertility. An  ectopic
pregnancy (development of an embryo
outside the uterus) most commonly
occurs in the fallopian tube. 
Fallot＊s tetralogy See tetralogy of Fallot.
fallout See radiation hazards.
falls in the elderly The tendency to
fall increases steadily with age. Reflex
actions become slower, and an elderly
person who trips is frequently too slow
to prevent a fall. Various medical condi-
tions common in the elderly, including
poor sight,  walking disorders, cardiac
arrhythmias,  hypotension, and  Parkin-
son＊s disease, increase the risk of falls,
as does taking  sleeping drugs or  tran-
quillizer drugs. 
Broken bones (see fracture) are a com-
mon complication of falls, especially in
women. Not only do women have more
falls, they are also more likely to suffer
fractures because their bone strength
may be reduced due to osteoporosis. A
fall, or the fear of falling, can also have
adverse psychological effects on an
elderly person, who may become reluc-
tant to leave the home. 
Falls may be prevented by taking com-
mon-sense measures such as ensuring
that handrails are secure, good lighting
is available, suitable footwear is worn,
and floor coverings and wiring are safe. 
false teeth See denture.
familial A term applied to a characteris-
tic or disorder that runs in families.
familial Mediterranean fever An
inherited condition that affects certain
Sephardic Jewish, Armenian, and Arab
families. Its cause is unknown. Symp-
toms usually begin between the ages of
5 and 15 years, and include recurrent
episodes of fever, abdominal and chest-
pain, and arthritis. Red skin swellings
sometimes occur, and affected people
may also suffer psychiatric problems.
Attacks usually last from 24每48 hours
but may be longer.  Between attacks
there are usually no symptoms. Although
there is no specific treatment for familial
Mediterranean fever, known sufferers
can reduce the incidence of attacks by
taking colchicine. Death may  eventually
occur from amyloidosis, which is a com-
plication of the condition.
family planning The deliberate limita-
tion or spacing of births. Strategies for
family planning include the different
methods of  contraception. (See also
birth control.)
family therapy A form of psychotherapy
that aims to promote greater harmony
and understanding between members
of a family, most often between parents
and adolescent children. 
famotidine An  H2 receptor antagonist
drug that promotes healing of peptic
ulcers and reduces inflammation of the
oesophagus (oesophagitis) by suppress-
ing acid production from the stomach.
Side effects, which include headaches
and dizziness, are uncommon.
Fanconi＊s anaemia A rare type of apla-
stic  anaemia characterized by severely
reduced production of all types of blood
cells by the bone marrow. 
Fanconi＊s syndrome A rare kidney dis-
order that occurs most commonly in
childhood. Various important chemicals,
such as amino acids, phosphate, calci-
um, and potassium, are lost in the urine,
leading to failure to thrive, stunting of
growth, and bone disorders such as rick-
ets. Possible causes of the syndrome
include several rare inherited abnormal-
ities of body chemistry and an adverse
reaction to certain drugs.
The child may resume normal growth
if an underlying chemical abnormality
can be corrected. Alternatively, a kidney
transplant may be possible.
fantasy The process of imagining ob-
jects or events that are not actually
occurring or present. The term also
refers to the mental image. Fantasy can
give the illusion that wishes have been
met. In this sense, it provides satisfac-
tion and can be a means of helping
people to cope when reality becomes
too unpleasant. Fantasy can also stimu-
late creativity. Psychoanalysts believe
that some fantasies are unconscious
and represent primitive instincts; these
fantasies are presented to the con-
scious mind in symbols. 
FANTASY FALLOT＊S TETRALOGY
F222
farmer＊s lung An occupational disease
affecting the lungs of farm workers.
Farmer＊s lung is a type of allergic alveo-
litis, in which affected people develop
hypersensitivity to certain moulds that
grow on hay, grain, or straw. Symptoms
develop about 6 hours after exposure 
to dust containing fungal spores and
include shortness of breath, headache,
fever, and muscle aches. In acute at-
tacks, the symptoms last for about a day.
Repeated exposure to spores may lead
to a chronic form of the disease, caus-
ing permanent scarring of lung tissues. 
Diagnosis of farmer＊s lung may involve
a  chest X-ray, pulmonary function tests,
and blood tests for a specific  antibody.
Corticosteroid drugs will relieve the symp-
toms. Further exposure to the spores of
the fungus should be avoided. (See also
fibrosing alveolitis.)
fascia Fibrous connective tissue that sur-
rounds many structures in the body.
One layer of the tissue, known as the
superficial fascia, envelops the entire
body just beneath the skin. Another
layer, the deep fascia, encloses muscles,
forming a sheath for individual muscles
and separating them into groups; it also
holds in place soft organs such as the
kidneys. Thick fascia in the palm of the
hand and sole of the foot have a cush-
ioning, protective function.
fasciculation Spontaneous, irregular, and
usually continual contractions of a mus-
cle that is apparently at rest. Unlike the
contractions of  fibrillation, fasciculation
is visible through the skin.
Minor fasciculation, such as that which
occurs in the eyelids, is common and is
no cause for concern. However, persis-
tent fasciculation with weakness in the
affected muscle indicates damage to
nerve cells in the spine that control the
muscle or nerve fibres that connect 
the spinal nerves to the muscle; motor
neuron disease is one such disorder.
fasciitis Inflammation of a layer of  fas-
cia (fibrous connective tissue), causing
pain and tenderness. Fasciitis is usually
the result of straining or injuring the
fascia surrounding a muscle; it most
commonly affects the sole of the foot.
Fasciitis may occur in people who suffer
from ankylosing spondylitis (a rheumatic
disorder affecting the spine) or Reiter＊s
syndrome (inflammation of the urethra,
conjunctivitis, and arthritis).
Treatment involves resting the affected
area and protecting it from pressure. In
some cases, a local injection of a  cor-
ticosteroid drug is given. If fasciitis is
part of a widespread disorder of the
joints, treatment of this condition will
generally improve symptoms.
fascioliasis A disease affecting the liver
and bile ducts that is caused by infesta-
tion with the liver fluke species FASCIOLA
HEPATICA.
fasciotomy An operation to relieve pres-
sure on muscles by making an incision
in the  fascia (fibrous connective tissue)
that surrounds them. The operation is
usually performed to treat compartment
syndrome, a painful condition in which
constriction of a group of muscles causes
obstruction of blood flow. Fasciotomy is
also sometimes performed as a surgical
emergency after an injury has resulted
in muscle swelling or bleeding within a
muscle compartment. 
fasting Abstaining from all food and
drinking only water. In temperate con-
ditions and at moderate levels of physical
activity, a person can survive on water
alone for more than 2 months; however,
without food or drink, death usually oc-
curs within about 10 days.
About 6 hours after the last meal, the
body starts to use glycogen (a carbohy-
drate stored in the liver and muscles).
This continues for about 24 hours, after
which the body obtains energy from
stored fat and by breaking down protein
in the muscles. If fasting continues, the
body＊s metabolism slows down to con-
serve energy, and the fat and protein
stores are consumed more slowly.
In the initial stages of fasting, weight
loss is rapid. Later it slows down, be-
cause metabolism slows down and the
body starts to conserve its salt supply,
which causes water retention. In pro-
longed fasting, the ability to digest food
may be impaired because the stomach
stops secreting digestive juices. Pro-
longed fasting also halts production of
sex hormones, causing amenorrhoea (ab-
sence of menstruation) in women. 
fatigue See tiredness.
FARMER＊S LUNG FATIGUE
F223
fats and oils Nutrients that provide the
body with its most concentrated form 
of  energy. Fats, which are also called
lipids, are compounds containing chains
of carbon and hydrogen with very little
oxygen. Chemically, fats consist mostly
of  fatty acids combined with  glycerol.
They are divided into 2 main groups,
saturated and unsaturated, depending
on the proportion of hydrogen atoms. If
the fatty acids contain the maximum
possible quantity of hydrogen, the fats
are saturated. If some sites on the car-
bon chain are unoccupied by hydrogen,
they are unsaturated; when many sites
are vacant, they are polyunsaturated.
Monounsaturated fats are unsaturated
fats with only one site that could take
an extra hydrogen. Animal fats, such as
those in meat and dairy products, are
largely saturated, whereas vegetable fats
tend to be unsaturated.
Fats are usually solid at room temper-
ature; oils are liquid. The amount and
types of fat in the diet have important
implications for health. A diet contain-
ing a large amount of fat, particularly
saturated fat, is linked to an increased
risk of  atherosclerosis and subsequent
heart disease and stroke. 
Some dietary fats, mainly triglycerides
(combinations of glycerol and 3 fatty
acids), are sources of the fat-soluble
vitamins A, D, E, and K and of essential
fatty acids. Triglycerides are the main
form of fat stored in the body. These
stores act as an energy reserve and also
provide insulation and a protective layer
for delicate organs. Phospholipids are
structural fats found in cell membranes.
Sterols, such as cholesterol, are found in
animal and plant tissues; they have a
variety of functions, often being con-
verted into hormones or vitamins. 
Dietary fats are first emulsified by 
bile salts before being broken down 
by lipase, a pancreatic enzyme. They are
absorbed via the lymphatic system be-
fore entering the bloodstream. 
Lipids are carried in the blood bound
to protein; in this state they are known
as lipoproteins. There are 4 classes of
lipoprotein: very low-densitylipoproteins
(VLDLs), low-density lipoproteins (LDLs),
high-density lipoproteins (HDLs), and
chylomicrons. LDLs and VLDLs contain
large amounts of cholesterol, which
they carry through the bloodstream and
deposit in tissues. HDLs pick up choles-
terol and carry it back to the liver for
processing and excretion. High levels of
LDLs are associated with atheroscler-
osis, whereas HDLs have a protective
effect. (See also nutrition.)
fatty acids Organic acids, containing
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, that are
constituents of  fats and oils. There 
are more than 40 fatty acids, which are
found in nature and which are distin-
guished by their constituent number of
carbon and hydrogen atoms. 
Certain fatty acids cannot be synthe-
sized by the body and must be provided
by the diet. These are linoleic, linolenic,
and arachidonic acids, sometimes col-
lectively termed essential fatty acids.
Strictly speaking, only linoleic acid is
essential, since the body can make the
other 2 from linoleic acid obtained from
food. (See also nutrition.)
favism A disorder characterized by an
extreme sensitivity to the broad bean
VICIA FABA (fava). If an affected person
eats these beans, a chemical in the 
bean causes rapid destruction of red
blood cells, leading to a severe type of
anaemia (see anaemia, haemolytic). 
Favism is uncommon except in some
areas of the Mediterranean. The dis-
order is caused by a sex-linked genetic
disorder. Affected people have  G6PD
deficiency, a defect in a chemical path-
way in their red cells that normally
helps protect the cells from injury. 
Children with a family history of fav-
ism can be screened for the disorder at
an early age. If it is found, they must
avoid fava beans and certain drugs,
including some  antimalarial drugs and
antibiotic drugs, that can have a similar
effect on their red blood cells.
febrile Feverish or related to  fever, as 
in febrile convulsions. 
febrile convulsion See  convulsion,
febrile.
feedback A self-regulating mechanism
that controls certain body processes
such as hormone and enzyme produc-
tion. If, for example, levels of a hormone
are too high, output  of any substance
FEEDBACK FATS AND OILS
Fdepending on the birth weight, rate of
growth, and contentment with feeding.
By 6 months, the baby should be eating
true solids, such as chopped-up meat
and vegetables. 
A few babies have an intolerance to
certain foods such as lactose or cow＊s
milk protein (see food intolerance; nutri-
tional disorders).
femoral artery A major blood vessel
that supplies oxygenated blood to the
leg. The femoral artery is formed in the
pelvis from the iliac artery (the terminal
branch of the  aorta). It then runs from
the groin, down in front of the thigh,
and passes behind the knee to become
the popliteal artery, which branches
again to supply the lower leg.
femoral epiphysis, slipped Displace-
ment of the upper  epiphysis (growing
end) of the  femur  (thigh bone). Such
displacement is rare; it usually affects
children between 11 and 13, and occurs
more often in boys and obese children.
The condition may also run in families.
During normal growth, the epiphysis is
separated from the shaft of the bone by
a plate of cartilage. This is an area of
relative weakness, so that a fall or other
injury can cause the epiphysis to slip
out of position. A limp develops, and
224
that stimulates the hormone＊srelease is
inhibited; the result is reduced hormone
production (negative feedback). The re-
verse process,(positive feedback) restores
the balance if the level of hormone
becomes too low. 
feeding, artificial The administration
of nutrients other than by mouth, usu-
ally by way of a tube passed through 
the nose into the stomach or small
intestine. If long-term artificial feeding
is anticipated, a tube is inserted directly
into the stomach or upper small intes-
tine using endoscopic surgery. If the
gastrointestinal tract is not functioning,
nutrients must be introduced into the
bloodstream. This type of feeding is
known as parenteral nutrition. 
Tube feeding may be necessary for
people who have gastrointestinal disor-
ders (for example, conditions resulting
in malabsorption) or disorders affecting
the nervous system or kidneys. Prema-
ture babies often require tube feeding if
their sucking reflexes are undeveloped,
as do critically ill patients due to their
increased nutritional requirements. In-
travenous feeding is usually given when
large areas of the small intestine have
been damaged by disease or have been
surgically removed.
feeding, infant A baby grows more
rapidly in its first year than at any future
time in its life. A good diet is essential
for healthy growth and development.
During the first 4 to 6 months, most
babies＊ nutritional requirements are met
by milk alone, whether by breast-feeding
or bottle-feeding. Both human milk and
artificial milk contain carbohydrate,
protein, fat, vitamins, and  minerals in
similar proportions. However, human
milk also contains antibodies and white
blood cells that protect the baby
against infection. From 6 weeks, supple-
mentary vitamin D should be given to
breast-fed babies. Formula milk already
contains vitamin supplements.
At 1 year of age, a baby can be safely
fed with full-fat cow＊s milk. Vitamin sup-
plements should then be given until the
baby is established on a mixed diet.
Solids, initially in the form of purees
and wheat-free cereals, should be intro-
duced between 4 and 6 months of age,
FEEDING, ARTIFICIALFEMORAL EPIPHYSIS, SLIPPED
F
Femoral
artery
Aorta
Popliteal
artery
Popliteal
vein Posterior 
tibeal artery
Anterior
tibeal artery
Femoral
vein
FEMORALARTERY
Common
iliac vein
Iliac
arterypain is felt in the knee or groin. The leg
tends to turn outwards and hip move-
ments are restricted.
Surgery is needed to fix the epiphysis
into its correct position and is usually
completely successful. In some cases, the
other hip may also need to be stabilized.
femoral hernia A type of  hernia that
occurs in the groin area, where the
femoral artery and femoral vein pass
from the lower abdomen to the thigh.
femoral nerve One of the main nerves
of the leg. The nerve fibres making up
the femoral nerve emerge from the low-
erspine and run down into the thigh,
where they branch to supply the skin
and quadriceps muscles. 
Damage to the femoral nerve (which
impairs the ability to straighten the
knee) is usually caused by a slipped
disc in the lumbar region of the spine
(see  disc prolapse). Damage may also
result from a backward dislocation of
the hip or a neuropathy.
femur The medical name for the thigh-
bone, the longest bone in the body. The
lower end hinges with the tibia (shin) to
form the knee joint. The upper end is
rounded into a ball (head of the femur)
that fits into a socket in the pelvis to
form the hip joint. The head of the
femur is joined to the bone shaft by a
narrow piece of bone called the neck of
the femur, which is a common fracture
site (see femur, fracture of).
At the lower end, the bone is enlarged
to form 2 lumps (the condyles) that dis-
tribute the weight-bearing load through
the knee joint. On the outer side of the
upper femur is a protuberance called
the greater trochanter. The shaft of the
femur is surrounded by muscles which
move the hip and knee joints. 
femur, fracture of The symptoms, treat-
ment, and possible complications of a
fracture of the femur (thigh-bone) dep-
end on whether the bone has broken
across its neck (the short section
between the top of the shaft and the hip
joint) or across the shaft.
Fracture of the neck of the femur, often
called a broken hip, is very common in
elderly people, especially in women
with osteoporosis, and is usually associ-
ated with a fall. In a fracture of the neck
225
of the femur, the broken bone ends are
often considerably displaced; in such
cases there is usually severe pain in the
hip and groin, making standing impos-
sible. Occasionally, the broken ends
become impacted. In this case, there is
less pain and walking may be possible.
Diagnosis is confirmed by X-ray. If the
bone ends are displaced, an operation
under general anaesthesia is necessary,
either to realign the bone ends and to
fasten them together, or to replace the
entire head and neck of the femur with
an artificial substitute (see hip replace-
ment). If the bone ends are impacted
the fracture may heal naturally, but
surgery may still be recommended to
avoid the need for bed rest.
Complications include damage to the
blood supply to the head of the femur,
causing it to disintegrate. Osteoarthritis
may develop in the hip joint after frac-
ture of the femur neck itself. However,
immobility and the need for surgery in
the elderly may result in complications,
such as pneumonia, that are not dir-
ectly related to the fracture site.
Fracture of the bone shaft usually
occurs when the femur is subjected 
to extreme force, such as that which
occurs in a traffic accident. In most
cases, the bone ends are considerably
displaced, causing severe pain, tender-
ness, and swelling.
Diagnosis is confirmed by X-ray. With
a fractured femoral shaft there is often
substantial blood loss from the bone. In
most cases, the fracture is repaired by
surgery in which the ends of the bone
are realigned and fastened together
with a metal pin. Sometimes the bone
ends can be realigned by manipulation,
and surgery is not necessary. After
realignment, the leg is supported with a
splint and put in  traction to hold the
bone together while it heals. 
Complications include failure of the
bone ends to unite or fusion of the bro-
ken ends at the wrong angle, infection
of the bone, or damage to a nerve or
artery. A fracture of the lower shaft can
cause permanent stiffness of the knee. 
fenbufen A  nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drug (NSAID) used to relieve pain
and stiffness caused, for example, by
FENBUFEN FEMORAL HERNIA
FA woman＊s ability to conceive depends
on normal  ovulation (the monthly pro-
duction of a healthy  ovum  by 1 of the
ovaries) and the ovum＊s unimpeded
passage down a fallopian tube towards
the uterus; on thinning of the mucus
surrounding the mouth of the cervix 
to enable sperm to penetrate; and on
changes in the lining of the uterus
which prepare it for the implantation of
a fertilized ovum. These processes are
in turn dependent on normal produc-
tion of gonadotrophins by the pituitary
gland, and of the sex hormones oestro-
gen and  progesterone by the ovaries.
Women become fertile at puberty, and
they remain so until the  menopause
around the age of 40 to 50. (See also
fertility drugs; infertility.) 
fertility drugs A group of hormonal or
hormone-related drugs used to treat
some types of infertility.
In women, fertility drugs may be given
when abnormal hormone production by
the pituitary gland or ovaries disrupts
ovulation or causes mucus around the
cervix to become so thick that sperm
cannot penetrate it. In men, fertility
drugs are less effective, but they may 
be used when abnormal hormone pro-
duction by the pituitary gland or testes
interferes with sperm production. (See
also clomifene;  gonadotrophin hor-
mones; testosterone.)
fertilization The union of a sperm and an
ovum. In natural fertilization, the sperm
and ovum unite in the fallopian tube of
the woman following sexual intercourse.
A single sperm penetrates the ovum by
releasing enzymes that can dissolve the
outer layers of the ovum. Once inside,
the sperm＊s nucleus fuses with that of the
ovum, and its empty body shell and tail
drop off. Then, the newly fertilized ovum,
called a zygote, forms an outer layer that
is impenetrable to other sperm. The zy-
gote undergoes repeated cell divisions
as it passes down the fallopian tube to
the uterus, where it implants and will
eventually grow into an embryo.
Fertilization may also occur as a result
of semen being artificially introduced
into the cervix (see  artificial insemina-
tion) or may take place in a laboratory
(see in vitro fertilization).
226
rheumatoid arthritis,  osteoarthritis, and
gout. Fenbufen is also used to reduce
pain and to help speed recovery follow-
ing muscle and ligament sprains. In
common with other NSAIDs, it can
cause bleeding from the stomach and
may also cause a rash.
fenoprofen A  nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
matory drug (NSAID) that is used to
relieve pain and stiffness caused, for
example, by rheumatoid arthritis, osteo-
arthritis, and  gout. Fenoprofen is also
used to treat muscle and ligament
sprains; it reduces pain and helps to
speed recovery. In common with many
NSAIDs, fenoprofen may cause irrita-
tion of the stomach.
fentanyl An  opioid analgesic drug that
is given by injection for pain relief dur-
ing surgery and also to enhance general
anaesthesia (see  anaesthesia, general).
Fentanyl is also used in the form of a
skin patch to control the severe chronic
pain of conditions such as cancer. In
common with other opioid drugs, fen-
tanyl has side effects that include
depressed breathing, constipation,nau-
sea, and vomiting. The administration
of patches may be associated with local
irritation of the skin.
ferritin A complex of  iron and protein,
found mainly in the liver and spleen,
which is the principal form of iron stor-
age in the body.
ferrous fumarate A form of  iron given
in the form of an oral preparation to
treat iron-deficiency  anaemia. Ferrous
fumarate can cause diarrhoea, constipa-
tion, and abdominal pain.
ferrous sulphate Another name for iron
sulphate (see iron). 
fertility The ability to produce children
without undue difficulty.
A man＊s fertility depends on the pro-
duction of normal quantities of healthy
sperm in the testes (see testis), which, in
turn, dependson  adequate production
of gonadotrophin hormones by the pitu-
itary gland at the base of the brain.
Fertility in males is also dependent on
the ability to achieve an erection and to
ejaculate  semen into the vagina during
sexual intercourse. Males become fertile
at puberty and usually remain so, but to
a lesser degree, well into old age.
FENOPROFEN FERTILIZATION
Ffetal alcohol syndrome A rare condi-
tion consisting of a combination of
congenital defects that result from the
continuous consumption of excessive
amounts of  alcohol by the mother
throughout  pregnancy. The affected
baby has diminished growth, delayed
mental development, a small head, a
small brain, and small eyes. He or she
may have a cleft palate, a small jaw,
heart defects, and joint abnormalities.
As a newborn, the baby sucks poorly,
sleeps badly, and is irritable as a result
of alcohol withdrawal. Almost one-fifth
of affected babies die during the first
few weeks of life; and many who survive
are, to some degree, mentally and
physically handicapped. 
fetal circulation Blood circulation in
the fetus is different from the normal
circulation after birth (see  circulatory
system). The fetus neither breathes nor
eats. Therefore, oxygen and nutrients
are obtained and waste products such
as carbon dioxide are removed via the
placenta. Fetal blood reaches the pla-
centa through blood vessels in the
umbilical cord. The maternal and fetal
circulations are separated by a thin
membrane in the placenta, which allows
the exchange of nutrients and waste
products. The other fundamental differ-
ence in circulation is that most blood
bypasses the lungs in the fetus through
2 special channels in the fetal heart.
Blood passes from the right atrium of
the heart to the left atrium through the
foramen ovale. Another channel, known
as the ductus arteriosus, allows blood
to pass from the pulmonary artery to
the aorta. Both channels normally close
after birth. In rare cases, they fail to
close, causing a congenital heart disor-
der (see heart disease, congenital). 
fetal distress The physical stress experi-
enced by a fetus during labour as a
result of its not receiving enough oxygen.
During a contraction, the uterus tight-
ens and reduces the oxygen supply from
the placenta to the fetus. If, in addition,
there are problems, such as pressure on
the umbilical cord or the mother＊s los-
ing blood, there may be an inadequate
amount of oxygen reaching the fetus.
Fetal distress may cause the baby＊s
heart-rate to slow or to fail to show nor-
mal variability, which can be recorded
on a cardiotocograph (see  fetal heart
monitoring).  Acidosis (high acidity in
the body), which can be detected in a
sample of blood taken from the scalp,
indicates that the oxygen supply to the
fetus is inadequate. Signs of meconium
in the amniotic fluid can also be an
indication of fetal distress.
Fetal distress sometimes occurs as a
temporary episode, but, if acidosis is
severe, the distressed fetus may need 
to be delivered promptly by  caesarean
section,  forceps delivery, or  vacuum
extraction. (See also childbirth.)
fetal heart monitoring The use of an
instrument to record and/or listen to 
an unborn baby＊s heartbeat during
pregnancy and labour. Monitoring is
carried out at intervals throughout preg-
nancy if tests indicate that the placenta
is not functioning normally or if the
baby＊s growth is slow. During labour,
monitoring can detect  fetal distress, in
which oxygen deprivation causes abnor-
mality in the fetal heart-rate. 
The simplest form of fetal heart moni-
toring involves the use of a special fetal
227
FETAL HEART MONITORING FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME
F
Umbilical 
vein
Umbilical 
arteries
Left 
atrium
To upper body  From upper
body 
Right 
atrium
Lung
Foramen
ovale
Ductus 
venosus
(liver 
bypass)
Aorta
Ductus
arteriosus
(lung
bypass)
Heart
To lower 
body 
Descending
aorta
FETAL CIRCULATION
Placenta
Pulmonary
arterystethoscope. Cardiotocography, a more
sophisticated electronic version, makes
a continuous paper recording of the
heartbeat together with a recording of
the uterine contractions. The heartbeat
is picked up either externally by an
ultrasound transducer strapped to the
mother＊s abdomen or, as an alternative
during labour, internally by an electrode
attached to the baby＊s scalp that passes
through the vagina and cervix.
fetishism Reliance on special objects in
order to achieve sexual arousal. The
objects need not have an obvious sex-
ual meaning; they may include shoes,
rubber or leather garments, and parts of
the body, such as the feet or ears.
Fetishism usually has no obvious
cause. According to psychoanalysts, the
origin may be a childhood  fixation of
sexual interest upon some aspect of the
mother＊s appearance. Treatment is nec-
essary only if the behaviour is causing
distress or persistent criminal acts. 
fetoscopy A procedure for directly obs-
erving a fetus inside the uterus by
means of a fetoscope, a type of  endo-
scope. Fetoscopy is used to diagnose
various congenital abnormalities before
the baby is born. Because the technique
carries some risks, it is performed only
when other tests such as  ultrasound
scanning have detected an abnormality.
By attaching additional instruments, it
is also possible to use the fetoscope to
take samples of fetal blood or tissue for
analysis and to correct surgically some
fetal disorders. (See also amniocentesis;
chorionic villus sampling.)
fetus The unborn child from the end of
the 8th week after conception until
birth. For the first 8 weeks, the unborn
child is called an embryo.
fever Elevation  above normal  of body
temperature. Normal body temperature
is 37oC in the mouth and 0.6oC lower in
the axilla (armpit). A fever may be accom-
panied by symptoms such as shivering,
headache, sweating, thirst, faster-than-
normal breathing,  and a flushed face.
Confusion or delirium sometimes occur,
especially in the elderly; a high fever
may cause seizures in a child under 5
years (see convulsion, febrile) or coma.
Most fevers are caused by a bacterial
infection such as  tonsillitis or a viral in-
fection such as influenza. In these cases,
proteins called pyrogens are released
when the white blood cells fight the
microorganisms that are responsible for
the infection. Pyrogens act on the tem-
perature controlling centre in the brain,
causing it to raise the body temperature
in an attempt to destroy the invading
microorganisms. Fever may also occur
in conditions, such as dehydration, thyro-
toxicosis,  lymphoma,and  myocardial
infarction, where infection is not present.
Drugs such as  aspirin or other  nons-
teroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,  or
paracetamol may be given to reduce
fevers that are due to infections. 
228
FETISHISM FEVER
F
Cardiotocograph
EXTERNAL FETAL HEART MONITORING
FETALHEARTMONITORING
Ultrasound transducer  Pressure
sensitive
gauge Trace showing uterine
contractions and
baby＊s heartbeat 229
Otherwise, treatment is directed at the
underlying cause (for example, giving
antibiotic drugs for a bacterial infection).
feverfew The common name for the
plant  TANACETUMPARTHENIUM, which is
used in herbal medicine to treat head-
ache and migraine.
fibrates A group of lipid-lowering drugs
used to treat high blood levels of  tri-
glycerides or cholesterol.
fibre, dietary Indigestible plant mater-
ial in food. Dietary fibre includes certain
types of polysaccharides, cellulose,
hemicelluloses, gums and pectins (see
carbohydrates), and lignin. Humans do
not have the necessary enzymes to
digest these substances, which pass
through the digestive system virtually
unchanged and cannot be used as a
source of energy. 
Some components of dietary fibre hold
water, thereby adding bulk to the faeces
and aiding bowel function. For this rea-
son, dietary fibre can be effective in
treating constipation,diverticular disease,
and irritable bowel syndrome. Unrefined
carbohydrate foods such as wholemeal
bread, cereals, and root vegetables are
rich in fibre. (See also nutrition.)
fibre-optics The transmission of ima-
ges through bundles of thin, flexible
glass or plastic threads which propa-
gate light by total internal reflection.
This means that all the light from a
powerful external source travels the
length of the fibre without losing its
intensity. Fibre-optics have led to the
development of  endoscopes, which en-
able structures deep within the body 
to be viewed directly. 
fibrillation Localized spontaneous, rapid
contractions of individual muscle fibres.
Unlike  fasciculation (muscular quiver-
ing), fibrillation cannot be seen through
the skin. In skeletal muscles, fibrillation
is detected by an EMG. In heart muscle,
it is detected by an ECG.
Fibrillation usually occurs once a nerve
supplying a muscle is destroyed, which
causes the affected muscle to become
weak and waste away. Fibrillation of the
heart muscle is caused by disruption to
the spread of nerve impulses through
the muscle wall of a heart chamber (see
atrial fibrillation; ventricular fibrillation).
fibrin A substance that is produced in
the blood during the process of  blood
clotting. A dissolved protein called
fibrinogen is converted to fibrin, which
forms long filaments that bind clumps
of platelets and other blood cells into a
mass which plugs the bleeding point.
fibrinogen A protein that is present in
blood and which is converted into fibrin
during the blood clotting process.
fibrinolysis The breakdown of fibrin, the
principal component of any blood clot.
Fibrin is a stringy protein that is formed
in blood as the end product of coagula-
tion (see  blood clotting). Blood also
contains a fibrinolytic system, which is
activated in parallel with the coagulation
system when a blood vessel is damaged.
The fibrinolytic system prevents the for-
mation of clots in undamaged blood
vessels, thereby preventing blockage, and
it dissolves a clot once a broken vessel
wall has healed. Thrombosis (abnormal
clot formation) occurs if there is a dis-
turbance in the balance between the
coagulation and fibrinolytic mechanisms.
fibrinolytic drugs Another name for
thrombolytic drugs, which are used to
dissolve blood clots. 
fibroadenoma A noncancerous fibrous
tumour most commonly found in the
breast. Fibroadenomas of the breast are
painless, firm, round lumps and are usu-
ally 1每5 cm in diameter and movable.
They occur most often in women under
30 and black women. Multiple tumours
may develop in one or both breasts. 
The lumps are removed surgically and
the tissue examined to confirm diagnosis.
fibroadenosis An outdated term for the
general lumpiness that is a normal fea-
ture of some women＊s breasts. Cyclical
changes in hormone levels often lead 
to lumpiness, which is more obvious
before a menstrual period. Lumpy
breasts do not increase the risk of deve-
loping breast cancer. However, a new
solitary, discrete breast lump should be
assessed by a doctor to rule out the
possibility of breast cancer.
fibrocystic disease A term used to
refer either to the inherited disorder
cystic fibrosis or the presence of general
lumpiness of the breasts that is a varia-
tion of normal. (See also fibroadenosis).
FIBROCYSTIC DISEASE FEVERFEW
F230
fibroid A slow-growing, noncancerous
tumour of the  uterus, consisting of
smooth muscle and  connective tissue.
There may be 1 or more fibroids, and
they may be as small as a pea or as
large as a grapefruit.
Fibroids are common, appearing most
often in women aged 35 to 45. The
cause is thought to be related to an
abnormal response to  oestrogen hor-
mones.  Oral contraceptives containing
oestrogen can cause fibroids to enlarge,
as can pregnancy. Decreased oestrogen
production after the menopause usually
causes them to shrink.
In many cases, there are no symptoms.
If a fibroid enlarges and projects into
the cavity of the uterus, it may cause
heavy or prolonged periods. A large
fibroid may exert pressure on the blad-
der, causing frequent passing of urine,
or on the bowel, causing backache or
constipation. Fibroids that distort the
uterine cavity may be responsible for
recurrent miscarriage or infertility. 
Fibroids that do not cause symptoms
are often discovered during a routine
pelvic examination. Ultrasound scanning
can confirm the diagnosis. Small, symp-
tomless fibroids usually require no
treatment, but regular examinations may
be needed to assess growth. Surgery is
required for fibroids that cause serious
symptoms. In some cases, they can be
removed with a  hysteroscope or under
general anaesthesia, leaving the uterus
intact. Sometimes, however, a hysterec-
tomy is necessary.
fibroma A noncancerous tumour of the
cells that make up connective tissue. For
example, a neurofibroma is a tumour of
the cells that surround nerve fibres (see
neurofibromatosis). Treatment is neces-
sary only if the tumour causes symptoms.
fibromyalgia A poorly understood dis-
order causing generalized aching and
stiffness of the muscles of the trunk,
hips, and shoulders. Parts of the affec-
ted muscles (known as trigger points)
are tender to the touch; common tender
sites are the base of the skull and the
muscles near the shoulderblades. Fibro-
myalgia commonly develops during
periods of stress and may follow a
chronic course. Treatment may consist
of heat, massage, and drugs such as
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and,
sometimes, antidepressant drugs, which
may relieve the symptoms.
fibrosarcoma A rare, cancerous tumour
of the cells that make up connective tis-
sue. A fibrosarcoma may develop from a
noncancerous  fibroma or may be can-
cerous from the start. Treatment is by
surgical removal and/or radiotherapy.
fibrosing alveolitis Inflammation and
thickening of the walls of the alveoli in
the lungs (see alveolus, pulmonary) that
results in scarring of lung tissue (see
interstitial pulmonary fibrosis). Fibrosing
alveolitis most commonly occurs in peo-
ple over 60 and is more common in men.
In some cases, fibrosing alveolitis is
due to an autoimmune disorder and may
be associated with conditions such as
rheumatoid arthritis or  systemic lupus
erethematosus. Other possible causes
include radiotherapy of the organs in the
chest and anticancer drug treatment. In
many cases, however, the cause is un-
known, and the condition is then known
as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. 
Symptoms of fibrosing alveolitis in-
clude shortness of breath, a persistent
dry cough, and joint pains. 
Treatment of the condition involves
corticosteroid drugs combined with other
immunosuppressant drugs to slow the
progress of lung damage.
fibrosis An overgrowth of scar tissue 
or connective tissue. Fibrous tissue may
be formed as an exaggerated healing
response to infection, inflammation, or
injury. Fibrosis can also result from a
lack of oxygen in a tissue, usually due to
inadequate blood flow through it (in
heart muscle damaged by a myocardial
infarction, for example). In fibrosis, spe-
cialized structures (such as kidney or
muscle cells) are replaced by fibrous
tissue, which causes impaired function
of the organ concerned.
fibrositis Pain and stiffness in the mus-
cles. Because investigation usually fails
to reveal any underlying cause, some
doctors do not recognize fibrositis as a
medical condition. However, tension
and bad posture may contribute. Some-
times, an attack occurs after an infection
or a new exercise. 
FIBROID FIBROSITIS
F231
Muscles most commonly affected are
those in the neck, shoulders, chest, back,
buttocks, and knees. There is usually no
restriction of movement. Sometimes,
attacks (which are generally worse in
cold, damp weather) are accompanied
by exhaustion and disturbed sleep.
Analgesic drugs, hot baths, and mas-
sage usually relieve pain and stiffness.
Exercises to improve posture may help
to prevent attacks. (See also back pain.)
fibula The outer and thinner of the 2
long bones of the lower leg. The fibula
is much narrower than the other lower-
leg bone, the  tibia (shin), to which it
runs parallel and to which it is attached
at both ends by ligaments. The top end
of the fibula does not reach the knee,
but the lower end extends below the
tibia and forms part of the  anklejoint.
The fibula is one of the most commonly
broken bones. Pott＊s fracture is fracture
of the fibula just above the ankle com-
bined with dislocation of the ankle and
sometimes with fracture of the tibia. 
fifth disease An infectious disease that
causes a widespread rash. Alsoknown
as slapped cheek disease or erythema
infectiosum, fifth disease mainly affects
children and is caused by a virus called
parvovirus. The rash starts on the cheeks
as separate, rose-red, raised spots, which
subsequently converge to give the char-
acteristic appearance. Within a few days,
the rash spreads in a lacy pattern over
the limbs but only sparsely on the trunk.
It is often accompanied by mild fever. The
rash usually clears after about 10 days.
Adults, who contract the disease only
rarely, may have joint pain and swelling
lasting for up to 2 years. The incubation
period is 7 to 14 days, and the only treat-
ment is drugs to reduce the fever.
fight-or-flight response Arousal of
the sympathetic part of the  autonomic
nervous system in response to fear but
which also occurs in  anxiety disorders.
Adrenaline (epinephrine),  noradrenaline
(norepinephrine), and other hormones
are released from the adrenal glands
and nervous system, leading to a raised
heart-rate, pupil dilation, and increased
blood flow to the muscles. These effects
make the body more efficient in either
fighting or fleeing the apparent danger. 
filariasis A group of tropical diseases,
caused by various parasitic worms or
their larvae, which are transmitted to
humans by insect bites. 
Some species of worm live in the lym-
phatic vessels. Swollen lymph nodes
and recurring fever are early symptoms.
Inflammation of lymph vessels results
in localized oedema. Following repeated
infections, the affected area, commonly
a limb or the scrotum, becomes very
enlarged and the skin becomes thick,
coarse, and fissured, leading to a condi-
tion known as  elephantiasis. The larvae
of another type of worm invade the eye,
causing blindness (see  onchocerciasis).
A third type, which may sometimes be
seen and felt moving beneath the skin,
causes loiasis, characterized by irritating
and sometimes painful areas of oedema
called calabar swellings.
The diagnosis of filariasis is confirmed
by microscopic examination of the
blood. The  anthelmintic drugs diethyl-
carbamazine or ivermectin most often
cure the infection but may cause side
effects such as fever, sickness, muscle
pains, and increased itching. Diethyl-
carbamazine can be given preventively,
and the use of insecticides and protec-
tive clothing help to protect against
insect bites. (See also  roundworms;
insects and disease.) 
filling, dental The process of replacing
a chipped or decayed area of tooth with
an inactive material. Dental filling is
also used to describe the restorative
material itself. Amalgam, a hard-wear-
ing mixture of silver, mercury, and other
FILLING, DENTAL FIBULA
F
Enamel
Amalgam 
filling
Blood
vessels
Repaired
tooth surface
FILLING, DENTAL
Pulp
Gum
Nerve232
metals is generally used for back teeth.
If a front tooth is chipped, a bonding
technique (see bonding, dental) may be
used, in which plastic or porcelain
tooth-coloured material is attached to
the surface of the tooth. 
film badge A device that enables hos-
pital staff members to monitor their
exposure to radiation. Film badges are
worn by those people who work in X-ray
and radiotherapy departments. A badge
consists of a piece of photographic film
in a holder worn on the clothing. The
film has a fast (sensitive) emulsion on 1
side and a slow emulsion on the other.
Small doses of radiation blacken only
the fast emulsion; higher doses start to
blacken the slow emulsion and make
the fast emulsion opaque.
finasteride A specific enzyme inhibitor
drug that prevents testosterone from being
converted into the more potent  male
hormone, dihydrotestosterone. The drug
isused to treat noncancerous prostatic
enlargement (see prostate, enlarged), im-
proving the flow of urine. Side effects
include impotence and decreased libido
and ejaculate volume.
finger One of the digits of the hand. Each
finger has 3 phalanges (bones), which join
at hinge joints moved by muscle tendons,
and an artery, vein, and nerve running
down each side. The entire structure is
enclosed in skin with a nail at the tip.
Common finger injuries are lacerations,
fractures, tendon ruptures, and  mallet
finger. Infections such as paronychia can
occur, and inflamed flexor tendons may
cause  trigger finger.  Congenital finger
disorders include syndactyly, polydactyly,
missing fingers, or a webbed appearance
due to deep membrane between the fin-
gers; other finger disorders include
rheumatoid arthritis,  osteoarthritis,  Ray-
naud＊s disease, and dactylitis (swelling)
due to  sickle cell anaemia. Clubbing of
the fingers is a sign of chronic lung dis-
ease or some forms of congenital heart
disease. Tumours of the finger are rare
but may occur in chondromatosis. 
finger-joint replacement A surgical
procedure in which one or more arti-
ficial joints made of metal, plastic, or
silicone rubber are used to replace fin-
ger joints destroyed by disease, usually
rheumatoid arthritis or  osteoarthritis.
The procedure is usually successful in
relieving arthritic pain and enabling the
patient to use his or her hands again,
but it rarely restores normal movement.
fingerprint An impression left on a
surface by the pattern of fine curved
ridges on the skin of the fingertips. The 
ridges occur in 4 patterns: loops, arches,
whorls, and compounds (combinations
of the other 3). No 2 people, not even
identical twins, have the same finger-
prints. (See also genetic fingerprinting.)
first aid The immediate treatment of any
injury or sudden illness before profes-
sional medical care can be provided.
Most first aid consists of treating minor
injuries and burns, and fractures.
The aims of first-aid treatment in an
emergency are to preserve life, to pro-
tect the individual from further harm, to
provide reassurance, to make the victim
comfortable, to arrange for medical
help, and to find out as much as possible
about the circumstances of the accident
or injury. Various techniques can be used
to achieve these aims. For example, the
recovery position  helps to maintain an
open airway in an unconscious person
who is breathing; artificial respiration is
necessary if a person is not breathing.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation is essen-
tial if a person is not breathing and has
no heartbeat. Heavy bleeding can lead to
shock but can be controlled by applying
pressure at appropriate pressure points. 
fish oil A product occurring naturally in
some species of oily fish such as mack-
erel. Fish-oil preparations, which are
rich in omega-3 triglycerides, are used
as lipid-lowering drugs.
fistula An abnormal passage from an
internal organ to the body surface or be-
tween 2 organs. Fistulas may be present
from birth or may be acquired as a result
of tissue damage. Congenital types in-
clude tracheoesophageal fistulas, branchial
fistulas (see  branchial disorders), and
thyroglossal fistulas (see  thyroglossal
disorders). Acquired fistulas may result
from injury, infection, or cancer. Fistulas
between the intestine and the skin may
occur in Crohn＊s disease. Some types of
arteriovenous fistula (between an artery
and a vein) are surgically constructed to
FILM BADGE FISTULA
F233
provide ready access to the circulation
in people who are having dialysis. Some
types of fistula close spontaneously but
most need to be treated surgically.
fit See seizure.
fitness The capacity for performing phys-
ical activities without exhaustion. Fitness
depends on strength, flexibility, and en-
durance. Because cardiovascular fitness
is the precondition for all other forms of
fitness, regular aerobic exercise (see aero-
bics), which makes the body＊s use of
oxygen more efficient, is the basis of any
fitness programme. Specific activities,
such as weight training or yoga, can help
develop strength and flexibility when
included in a programme (see exercise).
When the body is fit, the maximum work
capacity and endurance are increased. A
fit person has a better chance of avoiding
coronary artery disease and preventing
the effects of age and chronic disease. 
fitness testing A series of exercises
designed to determine an individual＊s
level of  fitness, primarily cardiovascular
fitness and muscle performance. Fitness
testing is often carried out before a per-
son starts an exercise programme to
evaluate its safety and suitability or 
to monitor progress thereafter.
A physical examination is usually per-
formed, including measurement of body
fat, height, and weight. Blood and urine
tests may be done, including an analysis
of blood cholesterol. The performance of
the heart is measured by taking the pulse
before, during, and after aerobic exercise.
Another test involves measuring a per-
son＊s overall performance in a standard
exercise. (See also aerobics; exercise.)
fixation In psychoanalytic theory, the pro-
cess by which an individual becomes or
remains emotionally attached to real or
imagined objects or events during early
childhood. If the fixations are powerful,
resulting from traumatic events, they
can lead to immature and inappropriate
behaviour. Regression to these events is
regarded by some analysts as the basis
of certain emotional disorders.
Fixation also describes the alignment
and stabilization of fractured bones.
Fixation may be external, as with a plas-
ter cast, or internal, using pins, plates,
or nails introduced surgically.
flail chest A type of chest injury that
usually results from a traffic accident or
from violence. In flail chest, several ad-
jacent ribs are broken in more than one
place, producing a piece of chest wall
that moves in the opposite way to nor-
mal as  the victim breathes. The injury
may lead to respiratory failure and shock.
Emergency treatment consists of turn-
ing the person on to the affected side or
supporting the flail segment by firm strap-
ping. In severe cases, artificial ventilation
is needed until the chest wall is stable. 
flat-feet A condition, usually affecting
both feet, in which the arch is absent
and the sole rests flat on the ground.
The arches form gradually as supportive
ligaments and muscles in the soles de-
velop and are not usually fully formed
until about age 6. In some people, the
ligaments are lax or the muscles are weak
and the feet remain flat. Less commonly,
the arches do not form because of a
hereditary defect in bone structure. Flat-
feet can be acquired in adult life because
of fallen arches, sometimes as the result
of a rapid increase in weight. Weakening
of the supporting muscles and ligaments
may occur in neurological or muscular
diseases such as poliomyelitis. 
In most cases, flat-feet are painless
and require no treatment, although in
some cases the feet may ache on walk-
ing or standing. Arch supports can be
worn in the shoes for comfort. 
flatulence Abdominal discomfort or full-
ness that is relieved by passing wind
through the anus or belching. Flatulence
is a feature of many gastrointestinal
conditions, such as  irritable bowel syn-
drome and gallbladder disorders. 
flatus Gas, commonly known as ※wind§,
which is passed through the anus. Gas
is formed in the large intestine by the
action of bacteria on carbohydrates and
amino acids in food. Large amounts of
gas may cause abdominal discomfort
(see flatulence), which may be relieved by
the passage of wind or by defaecation.
flatworm Any species of worm that has
a flattened shape. Two types of flatworm
are parasites of humans: cestodes (tape-
worms) and trematodes (flukes, schisto-
somes; see liver fluke; schistosomiasis). 
flea bites See insect bites.
FLEA BITES FIT
Fflecainide An antiarrhythmic drug used
in the treatment of  tachycardia,  atrial
fibrillation, and  arrhythmias associated
with conditions such as Wolff每Parkinson每
White syndrome (a congenital abnormal-
ity of heart-rhythm). It is given, as tablets
or injection, to people resistant to or
intolerant of other treatment; and treat-
ment is always initiated in hospital. Side
effects may include dizziness, visual dis-
turbances, and worsening, or a new type
of, arrhythmia. Rarely, nausea, vomiting,
urticaria, vertigo, and jaundice occur.
flies See insects and disease.
floaters Fragments perceived to be float-
ing in the field of vision. Floaters move
rapidly with eye movement but drift
slightly when the eyes are still. They do
not usually affect vision. Most floaters
are shadows cast on the retina by
microscopic structures in the  vitreous
humour (the jelly-like substance behind
the lens). The sudden appearance of a
cloud of dark floaters, especially when
accompanied by light flashes, suggests
retinal tear or retinal detachment. A large
red floater that obscures vision is usu-
ally due to a vitreous haemorrhage. 
flooding A technique used in behaviour
therapy for treating phobias. 
floppy infant  A description of a baby
whose muscles lack normal tension or
tone (see hypotonia in infants).
floppy valve syndrome See  mitral
valve prolapse. 
flossing, dental The removal of plaque
(see  plaque, dental) and food particles
from around the teeth and gums by
234
using soft nylon or silk thread or tape.
Dental floss may be waxed or unwaxed.
Flossing should be carried out as an ad-
junct to toothbrushing.
flu See influenza.
flucloxacillin A  penicillindrug usually
used to treat staphylococcal infections.
fluconazole An antifungal drug used to
treat candidiasis, a fungal infection com-
monly affecting the vagina or mouth. It
may cause nausea and diarrhoea.
fluctuant A term used to describe the
movement within a swelling when it is
examined by touch. It is a sign that the
swelling contains fluid. The term is
often used to describe an abscess.
fluid retention Excessive accumulation
of fluid in body tissues. Mild fluid reten-
tion is common with  premenstrual
syndrome but disappears with the onset
of menstruation. However, more severe
fluid retention may be associated with
an underlying heart, liver, or kidney dis-
order (see  ascites;  nephrotic syndrome;
oedema). Diuretic drugs may be used to
treat the condition.
fluke A type of flattened worm, also
known as a trematode, that may infest
humans or animals. The 2 main diseases
caused by flukes are liver fluke infestation,
which occurs worldwide, and  schistoso-
miasis, a debilitating tropical disease. 
flunitrazepam A type of benzodiazepine
drug used as a sleeping drug to treat
insomnia. The effects of flunitrazepam
may persist the following day; and pro-
longed use may result in dependence.
fluorescein A harmless orange dye used
in ophthalmology as an aid to the diag-
nosis of certain eye disorders.
fluoridation The addition of fluoride to
the water supply as a means of reducing
the incidence of dental caries. 
fluoride A mineral that helpsto prevent
dental caries by strengthening tooth en-
amel (see teeth), making it more resistant
to acid attacks. Fluoride may also reduce
the acid-producing ability of micro-
organisms in plaque. In the UK, fluoride
is added to the water supply; it can also
be applied directly to the teeth as part
of dental treatment or used in the form of
mouthwashes or toothpastes. Ingestion
of excess fluoride during tooth forma-
tion can lead to fluorosis.
FLECAINIDE FLUORIDE
F
Dental floss
Floss curved
around tooth
DETAIL
FLOSSING, DENTAL235
fluorosis Mottling of the tooth enamel
caused by ingestion of excess  fluoride
as the teeth are formed. In severe cases,
the enamel develops brown stains. Such
cases occur mostly where the fluoride
level in water is far greater than the rec-
ommended level or when additional
fluoride supplements are taken. 
fluorouracil An anticancer drug used in
the treatment of cancers of the breast,
bladder, ovaries, and intestine. 
fluoxetine A type of antidepressant drug.
flurazepam A type of  benzodiazepine
drug used as a sleeping drug to treat
insomnia. The drug＊s effects may persist
the following day; and prolonged use
may result in dependence.
flurbiprofen A nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
matorydrug used particularly to ease
the symptoms of musculoskeletal disor-
ders such as rheumatoid arthritis.
flush Reddening of the face, and some-
times the neck, caused by dilation of
the blood vessels near the skin surface.
Flushing may occur during fever or as a
result of embarrassment.  Hot flushes
are common at the menopause.
foam, contraceptive See spermicides.
foetus An alternative spelling for fetus.
folic acid A vitamin that is essential for
the production of red blood cells by the
bone marrow. Folic acid is contained in
a variety of foods, particularly liver and
raw vegetables; adequate amounts are
usually included in a normal diet.
During pregnancy, folic acid is imp-
ortant for fetal growth and in the
development of the nervous system and
formation of blood cells. The incidence
of  neural tube defects is reduced if
women take folic acid supplements for
a month before conception and during
the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. 
Folic acid deficiency is a cause of
megaloblastic anaemia, which produces
symptoms such as headaches, fatigue,
and pallor. Deficiency can occur during
any serious illness or can be the result
of a nutritionally poor diet.
folie 角 deux A French term that is used
to describe the unusual occurrence of 
2 people sharing the same psychotic ill-
ness (see  psychosis). Commonly, the 
2 are closely related and share one or
more paranoid delusions. If the sufferers
are separated, one of them almost al-
ways quickly loses the symptoms, which
have been imposed by the dominant,
and genuinely psychotic, partner.
folk medicine Any form of medical treat-
ment that is based on popular tradition,
such as the charming of warts or the use
of copper bracelets to treat rheumatism.
follicle A small cavity in the body. For
example, a  hair follicle is a pit on the
skin surface from which hair grows.
follicle-stimulating hormone A  gon-
adotrophin hormone that is produced
and secreted by the pituitary gland and
acts on the ovary or testes. 
folliculitis Inflammation of 1 or more
hair follicles as a result of a  staphylo-
coccal infection. Folliculitis can occur
almost anywhere on the skin but com-
monly affects the neck, thighs, buttocks,
or armpits, causing a  boil; it may also
affect the bearded area of the face, pro-
ducing pustules (see  sycosis barbae).
Treatment is with antibiotic drugs. 
fomites Inanimate objects, such as bed
linen, clothing, books, or a telephone
receiver, that are not harmful in them-
selves but may be capable of harbouring
harmful microorganisms or parasites and
thus convey an infection from one per-
son to another. Fomites mainly transmit
respiratory infections, such as influenza.
The singular form of the word is fomes.
fontanelle One of the 2 membrane-
covered spaces between the bones of a
baby＊s skull. At birth, the skull bones
are not yet fully fused, and 2 soft areas
can be felt through the scalp. These are
the anterior fontanelle, which is dia-
mond-shaped and usually closes up by
age 18 months,
and the posterior
fontanelle, which
is triangular and
closes up within
the first 2 months.
It is normal for the
fontanelles to be-
come tense and
bulge out when a
baby cries. Per-
sistent tension at
other timesmay
indicate an abnor-
mality, particularly
FONTANELLE FLUOROSIS
F
Anterior
fontanelle
FONTANELLE236
hydrocephalus (the accumulation of fluid
in the skull). A sunken fontanelle may
be a sign of dehydration. If a fontanelle
is abnormally large, or takes a long time
to close, the cause may be a brain ab-
normality or a disorder, such as rickets,
affecting the skull bones. Early closure
of the fontanelles results in a deformity
called craniosynostosis.
Occasionally, a third fontanelle is pre-
sent between the other 2; this occurs in
Down＊s syndrome. 
food additives Any substance added to
food for the purposes of preservation or
to improve its acceptability in terms of
taste, colour, or consistency. 
Preservatives, such as sodium nitrate,
are added to food to control the growth
of bacteria, moulds, and yeasts. Other
additives, such as antioxidants, improve
the keeping quality of food by prevent-
ing undesirable changes (they stop
rancidity in foods containing fat, for
example). Additives that improve tex-
ture include emulsifiers, stabilizers,
thickeners, and gelling agents. Appear-
ance and taste are improved by the use
of colourings, flavourings, sweeteners,
and flavour enhancers. Artificial  sweet-
eners, such as saccharin, may be used
instead of sugar, especially in products
for diabetics or slimmers. 
Certain additives may produce an al-
lergic reaction in some people, and some
are thought to be a factor in behav-
ioural problems in children.
food allergy An inappropriate or exag-
gerated reaction of the  immune system
to a food. Sensitivity to cow＊s milk pro-
tein is a fairly common food allergy in
young children. Other foods most com-
monly implicated in food allergy are
nuts, wheat, fish, shellfish, and eggs.
Food allergy is more common in people
who suffer from other forms of  allergy
or  hypersensitivity, such as  asthma, al-
lergic rhinitis, and eczema.
Immediate reactions, occurring within
an hour or sometimes minutes of eating
the trigger food, include lip swelling,
tingling in the mouth or throat, vomiting,
abdominal distension, abnormally loud
bowel sounds, and diarrhoea. Some ser-
ious allergies can cause  anaphylactic
shock, requiring immediate self-injection
with  adrenaline (epinephrine). The only
effective treatment for food allergy is
avoidance of the offending food. (See
also food intolerance.)
food-borne infection Any infectious
illness caused by eating food contami-
nated with viruses, bacteria, worms, or
other organisms. There are 2 mechan-
isms by which food can become
infected. First, many animals that are
kept or caught for food may harbour
disease organisms in their tissues or
organs; and, if meat or milk from such
an animal is eaten without being thor-
oughly cooked or pasteurized, the
organisms may cause illness in their
human host. In the UK, the only com-
mon infection of this type is  food
poisoning. Second, food may be con-
taminated with organisms spread from
an infected person or animal, usually by
flies moving from faeces to food. 
Immunization is available against cer-
tain food- and  water-borne infections
such as typhoid fever. 
food fad A like or dislike of a particular
food or foods that is taken to extremes.
A food fad may lead to undue reliance
on, or avoidance of, a particular food-
stuff. Fads are common in toddlers,
adolescents, and in people who are under
stress. When a food fad becomes obses-
sive or persistent, it may indicate a
seriouseating disorder.(See also  ano-
rexia nervosa; bulimia.) 
food intolerance An adverse reaction
to a food or food ingredient that occurs
each time the substance is eaten, that
is not due to a psychological cause or
to food poisoning, and that does not in-
volve the immune system.
Food intolerance is often of unknown
cause. Certain foods may be poorly tol-
erated due to impaired digestion and
absorption associated with disorders of
the pancreas or biliary system. Some
people have a genetic deficiency of a
specific  enzyme, such as  lactase, which
is required to digest the sugar in milk.
food poisoning A term used for any
gastrointestinal illness of sudden onset
that is suspected of being caused by
eating contaminated food. Most cases
of food poisoning are due to contam-
ination of food by bacteria or viruses.
FOOD ADDITIVES FOOD POISONING
F237
The bacteria commonly responsible for
food poisoning belong to the groups
SALMONELLA, CAMPYLOBACTER, and E. COLI,
certain strains of which are able to mul-
tiply rapidly in the intestines to cause
widespread inflammation. Food poison-
ing mayalso be caused by LISTERIA (see
listeriosis).  Botulism is an uncommon,
life-threatening form of food poisoning
caused by a bacterial toxin.
The viruses that most commonly cause
food poisoning are astravirus, rotavirus,
and Norwalk virus (which affects shell-
fish). This can occur when raw or partly
cooked foods have been in contact with
water contaminated by human excrement.
Non-infective causes include poison-
ous mushrooms and toadstools (see
mushroom poisoning), fresh fruit and veg-
etables contaminated with high doses
of insecticide, and chemical poisoning
from foods such as fruit juice stored in
containers made partly from zinc. 
The onset of symptoms depends on the
cause of poisoning. Symptoms usually
develop within 30 minutes in cases of
chemical poisoning, between 1 and 12
hours in cases of bacterial toxins, and
between 12 and 48 hours with most
bacterial and viral infections. Symptoms
usually include nausea and vomiting,
diarrhoea, stomach pain, and, in severe
cases, shock and collapse. Botulism af-
fects the nervous system, causing visual
disturbances, difficulty with speech, para-
lysis, and vomiting. 
The diagnosis of bacterial food poi-
soning can usually be confirmed from
examination of a sample of faeces.
Chemical poisoning can often be diag-
nosed from a description of what the
person has eaten, and from analysis of
a sample of the suspect food. 
Mild cases can be treated at home.
Lost fluids should be replaced by intake
of plenty of clear fluids (see rehydration
therapy). In severe cases, hospital treat-
ment may be necessary. Except for
botulism, and some cases of mushroom
poisoning, most food poisoning is not
serious, and recovery generally occurs
within 3 days. However, some strains of
E. COLI can seriously damage red blood
cells and cause kidney failure. (See also
cholera; dysentery; typhoid fever.) 
foot The foot has 2 vital functions: to
support the weight of the body in
standing or walking and to act as a lever
to propel the body forwards.
The largest bone of the foot, the heel-
bone (see calcaneus), is jointed with the
ankle bone (the talus). In front of the
talus and calcaneus are the tarsal
bones, which are jointed the 5 meta-
tarsals. The phalanges are the bones of
the toes; the big toe has 2 phalanges;
all the other toes have 3.
Tendons passing around the ankle
connect the muscles that act on the
foot bones. The main blood vessels and
nerves pass in front of and behind the
inside of the ankle to supply the foot.
The undersurface of the normal foot
forms an arch supported by ligaments
and muscles. Fascia (fibrous tissue) and
fat form the sole of the foot, which is
covered by a layer of tough skin.
Injuries to the foot commonly result in
fracture of the metatarsals and phal-
anges. Congenital foot abnormalities 
are fairly common and include club-foot
(see talipes), and claw-foot. A bunion is a
common deformity in which a thickened
bursa (fluid-filled pad) lies over the
joint at the base of the big toe. Corns
are small areas of thickened skin and
are usually a result of tight-fitting
shoes. Verrucas (see  plantar warts)
develop on the soles of the feet.  Ath-
lete＊s foot is a fungal infection that
mainly affects the skin in between the
toes. Gout often affects the joint at the
base of the big toe. An ingrowing toe-
nail (see  toenail, ingrowing) commonly
FOOT FOOT
F
Phalanges
FOOT
Tarsals
Metatarsals
Calcaneus
BONES OF FOOT238
occurs on the big toe and may result 
in inflammation and infection of the
surrounding tissues (see  paronychia).
Foot-drop is the inability to raise the
foot properly when walking and is the
result of a nerve problem.
foot-drop A condition in which the foot
cannot be raised properly and hangs
limp from the ankle.  Neuritis  affecting
the nerves that supply muscles that
move the foot is a common cause and
may be due to diabetes mellitus, multiple
sclerosis, or a neuropathy. Weakness in
the foot muscles can also result from
pressure on a nerve (due to a disc pro-
lapse or a tumour) as it leaves the
spinal cord. Treatment is of the under-
lying cause, but in many people the
weakness persists. A lightweight plastic
caliper splint can be used to keep the
foot in place when walking.
foramen A natural opening in a bone or
other body structure, usually to allow
the passage of nerves or blood vessels.
For example, the foramen magnum is a
hole in the base of the cranium through
which the spinal cord passes.
forceps A tweezer-like instrument used
for handling tissues or equipment dur-
ing surgical procedures. Various types
of forceps are designed for specific pur-
poses. (See also forceps, obstetric.)
forceps delivery The use of forceps
(see  forceps, obstetric) to ease out the
baby＊s head during a difficult birth (see
childbirth). Forceps delivery is used if
the mother is unable to push out her
baby unaided, or if the baby is showing
signs of  fetal distress. Forceps are also
used to control the head once the body
has been delivered in breech delivery to
prevent too rapid a birth.
An episiotomy (making of a cut in the
perineum) is usually needed for a for-
ceps delivery. Recovery and care for
mother and child is usually the same 
as after a vaginal delivery.
forceps, obstetric Surgical instruments
that are used in  forceps delivery to
deliver the head of a baby in a difficult
labour. Obstetric forceps consist of 2
blades that can be locked together and
that cup the baby＊s head.
foreign body An object that is present
in an organ or passage of the body but
which should not be there. Common
sites for foreign bodies include the air-
ways (see choking), ear (see ear, foreign
body in), eye (see eye, foreign body in),
rectum, and vagina. 
forensic medicine The branch of med-
icine concerned with the law, especially
criminal law. The forensic pathologist is
a doctor who specializes in the exami-
nation of bodies when circumstances
suggest death was unnatural. Forensic
pathologists may also examine victims
of alleged sexual assault. Forensic sci-
entists use laboratory methods to study
body fluids (such as blood and semen)
found on or near the victim and com-
pare them with those from suspects.
They are also trained in ballistics and
the identification of fibres from cloth-
ing. In addition, forensic scientists may
advise on  blood groups and  genetic
fingerprinting in legal investigations. 
foreskin The popular name for the pre-
puce, the loose fold of skin that covers
the glans of the penis when it is flaccid
and which retracts during erection. At
birth, the foreskin is attached to the glans
and is not retractable. It then separates
over the first 3 to 4 years of life. The
foreskin may be removed (see circumci-
sion) for religious or medical reasons. 
In phimosis, the foreskin remains per-
sistently tight after the age of 5, causing
difficulty in passing urine and balloon-
ing of the foreskin. There may also be
recurrent balanitis (infection of the glans).
FOOT-DROP FORESKIN
F
Forceps Uterus Umbilical
cord
Fetus
FORCEPSDELIVERY239
In  paraphimosis, the foreskin becomes
stuck in the retracted position, causing
painful swelling of the glans that needs
emergency treatment. 
forgetfulness The inability to remem-
ber (see memory).
formaldehyde A colourless, pungent,
irritant gas. In medicine, a solution of
formaldehyde and a small amount of
alcohol in water, a preparation known
as formalin, is used to preserve tissue
specimens or to harden them before
they are stained and examined. Forma-
lin is also used as a disinfectant.
formication An unpleasant sensation,
as if ants were crawling over the skin.
This may occur following abuse of cer-
tain drugs, such as alcohol or morphine.
formula, chemical A way of expressing
the constituents of a chemical in sym-
bols and numbers. Water, for example,
has the formula H2O, indicating that
each molecule is composed of 2 atoms
of hydrogen (H2) and 1 of oxygen (O).
formulary A book of formulae. The term
formulary is commonly used to refer to
a publication that lists drug prepara-
tions and their components and effects.
The contents of a formulary can be
decided by a group of medical profes-
sionals working together to ensure
similar patterns of drug usage.
fovea An area of the  retina in the eye
that has the highest concentration of
light-sensitive cells. It is responsible for
detailed vision. (See also colourvision.)
fracture A break in a bone, usually across
its width. There are 2 main types: closed
(simple) or open (compound) fractures.
In a closed fracture, the broken bone
ends remain beneath the skin and little
surrounding tissue is damaged; in an
open fracture, 1 or both bone ends pro-
ject through the skin. If the bone ends
are not aligned, the fracture is termed
※displaced§. Fractures can be further
divided according to the pattern of the
break, for example, transverse or spiral
fractures of long bones. In a greenstick
fracture, the break is not through the
full width of the bone. This type of frac-
ture occurs only in children because
their bones are more pliable. In an avul-
sion fracture, a small piece of bone is
pulled off by a tendon. 
Most fractures are the result of a fall,
but in  osteoporosis the bone is weak-
ened, and fractures such as compression
fractures of the vertebrae are common.
Common sites of fracture include the
hand, wrist (see Colles＊ fracture),  ankle
joint, clavicle, and the neck of the femur
(see femur, fracture of). There is usually
swelling and tenderness at the fracture
site. The pain is often severe and is usu-
ally made worse by movement. 
X-rays can confirm a fracture. Because
bone begins to heal soon after it has
broken, the first aim of treatment is to
ensure that the bone ends are aligned.
Displaced bone ends are manoeuvred
back into position, under general
anaesthetic, by manipulation either
through the skin or through an incision.
The bone is then immobilized. In some
cases the ends of the bone may be fixed
with metal pins or plates.
Most fractures heal without any prob-
lems. Healing is sometimes delayed
because the blood supply to the affec-
ted bone is inadequate (as a result of
damaged blood vessels) or because the
bone ends are not close enough together.
If the fracture fails to unite, internal fix-
ation or a  bone graft may be needed.
Osteomyelitis is a possible complication
of open fractures. (See also Monteggia＊s
FRACTURE FORGETFULNESS
F
FRACTURE
TRANSVERSE
FRACTURE
SPIRAL
FRACTURE
GREENSTICK
FRACTURE
AVULSION
FRACTURE
COMMINUTED
FRACTURE
COMPRESSION
FRACTURE240
fracture; pelvis; Pott＊s fracture;  rib, frac-
ture of; skull, fracture of.)
fracture, dental A break in a tooth (see
teeth) most commonly caused by falling
onto a hard surface or by being hit in
the mouth with a hard object. Fractures
may involve the crown or the root of a
tooth, or both. Fractures of the enamel
can usually be repaired by bonding (see
bonding,  dental); in some cases, a
replacement crown may be fitted (see
crown, dental).  Pulpotomy may be
performed if the pulp of a tooth is dam-
aged. Fractures of the root may be
treated by splinting (see splinting, den-
tal),  root-canal treatment, or removing
the tooth (see extraction, dental).
fragile X syndrome An inherited defect
of the Xchromosome that causes learn-
ing difficulties.  The disorder occurs
within families according to an X-linked
recessive pattern of inheritance (see gen-
etic disorders). Although mainly males
are affected, women can become carriers
of the genetic defect. In addition to hav-
ing learning difficulties, affected males
tend to be tall and physically strong, with
large testes, a prominent nose and jaw,
increased ear length, and are prone to
epileptic seizures. About a third of female
carriers show some intellectual impair-
ment. The condition cannot be treated. 
freckle A tiny patch of pigmentation that
occurs on sun-exposed skin. Freckles tend
to become more numerous with contin-
ued exposure to sunlight. A tendency to
freckling is inherited and occurs most
often in fair and red-haired people.
free-floating anxiety Vague apprehen-
sionor tension, often associated with
generalized anxiety disorder.
free radicals Molecules that bind to and
destroy body cells. Free radicalscan
derive from external sources such as
smoke, sunlight,and food, but they are
mostly produced  in the body following
chemical reactions.
frequency See urination, frequent.
Freudian slip A slip of the tongue or a
minor error of action that could be what
the person really wanted to say or do. 
Freudian theory A discipline devel-
oped by  Sigmund Freud (1856-1939)
that formed the basis of psychoanalysis.
Freud believed that feelings, thoughts,
and behaviour are controlled by uncon-
scious wishes and conflicts originating
in childhood. Problems occur when the
desires are not fulfilled or conflicts
remain unresolved into adulthood. The
essence of his theory concerns early
psychological development, particularly
sexual development. He also identified
3 components of personality: the id, the
ego, and the  superego. (See also  psy-
choanalytic theory; psychotherapy.)
friar＊s balsam A name for tincture of
benzoin. Friar＊s balsam is used with hot
water as a  steam inhalation to relieve
nasal congestion, acute rhinitis, sinu-
sitis, and to loosen coughs. 
Friedreich＊s ataxia A very rare inheri-
ted disease in which degeneration of
nerve fibres in the spinal cord causes
loss of coordinated movement and bal-
ance. Once symptoms have developed,
the disease becomes progressively more
severe. Treatment can help with the
symptoms but cannot alter the course
of the disease.
frigidity Lack of desire for or inability
to become aroused during sexual stim-
ulation (see  sexual desire, inhibited).
(See also orgasm, lack of.) 
frontal A term referring to the front part
of an organ (for example, the frontal
lobe of the brain).
frostbite Damage to tissues caused by 
extremely cold temperatures. Frostbite
can affect any part of the body, but the
extremities (the nose, ears, fingers, and
toes) are most susceptible. The first
symptoms of frostbite are a pins-and-
needles sensation, followed by complete
numbness. The skin appears white, cold,
and hard and then becomes red and
swollen. If damage is restricted to the
skin and immediately underlying tis-
sues, recovery may be complete. If
blood vessels are affected,  gangrene
may follow. In such cases, amputation
of the affected part may be necessary.
frottage A sexual deviation in which an
individual rubs against another person
in order to achieve sexual arousal. 
frozen section A method of preparing
a biopsy specimen that provides a rapid
indication of whether or not a tissue,
such as a breast lump, is cancerous. Fro-
zen section can be undertaken during
FRACTURE, DENTAL FROZEN SECTION
F241
an operation so that the results can be
used to determine the appropriate sur-
gical treatment.
frozen shoulder Stiffness and pain in
the  shoulder that makes normal move-
ment of the joint impossible. In severe
cases, the shoulder may be completely
rigid, and pain may be intense.
Frozen shoulder is caused by inflam-
mation and thickening of the lining of
the joint capsule. In some cases, it
occurs following a minor injury to the
shoulder or a  stroke. The condition is
more common in middle-aged people
and those with diabetes mellitus.
Moderate symptoms of frozen shoul-
der can be eased by exercise, by taking
analgesic drugs and  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, and by applying
ice-packs. In severe cases, injections of
corticosteroid drugs into the joint may
be used. Manipulation of the joint under
a general anaesthetic can restore mobil-
ity,but this treatment carries the risk of
increasing pain in the joint initially.
Recovery is often slow but the shoulder
is usually back to normal and pain free
within 2 years.
frusemide An alternative name for furo-
semide, a diuretic drug.
frustration A deep feeling of discon-
tent and tension because of unresolved
problems, unfulfilled needs, or because
the path to a goal is blocked. In some
people, frustration may lead to  regres-
sion, aggression, or depression. 
FSH An abbreviation for follicle-stimulat-
ing hormone, a gonadotrophin hormone
produced by the pituitary gland.
fugue An episode of altered conscious-
ness in which a person apparently
purposefully wanders away from home
or work and, in some cases, adopts a
new identity. When the fugue ends, the
person has no recollection of what has
occurred. Fugues are uncommon, and
causes include  dissociative disorders,
temporal lobe epilepsy, depression, head
injury, and dementia. (See also amnesia.)
fulminant A term used to describe a
disorder that develops and progresses
suddenly and with great severity. A viru-
lent infection, a severe form of arthritis,
or a cancer that has spread rapidly is
usually described as being fulminant.
fumes See pollution.
functional disorders A term for any
illness in which there is no evidence of
organic disturbance even though physi-
cal performance is impaired.
fundus The part of a hollow body organ,
such as the stomach, that is farthest
away from its opening. An optic fundus
is the appearance of the retina when
viewed through an ophthalmoscope.
fungal infections Diseases that are
caused by the multiplication and spread
of fungi. Some fungi are harmlessly pre-
sent all the time in areas of the body
such as the mouth, skin, intestines, and
vagina. However, they are prevented from
multiplying by competition from bacte-
ria. Other fungi are dealt with by the
body＊s immune system. 
Fungal infections are therefore more
common and serious in people taking
long-term  antibiotic drugs (which des-
troy the bacterial competition) and in
those whose immune systems are sup-
pressed by  immunosuppressant drugs,
corticosteroid drugs, or by a disorder such
as AIDS. Such serious fungal infections
are described as opportunistic infections.
Some fungal infections are more com-
mon in people with diabetes mellitus.
Fungal infections can be classified into
superficial (affecting skin, hair, nails,in-
side of the mouth, and genital organs);
subcutaneous (beneath the skin); and
deep (affecting internal organs).
The main superficial infections are tinea
(including ringworm and athlete＊s foot)
and  candidiasis (thrush), both of which
are common. Subcutaneous infections,
which are rare, include  sporotrichosis
and mycetoma. Deep infections are un-
common but can be serious and include
aspergillosis,  histoplasmosis,  cryptococ-
cosis, and  blastomycosis. The fungal
spores enter the body by inhalation. 
Treatment of fungal infections is with
antifungal drugs, either used topically
on the infected area or given by mouth
for generalized infections.
fungi Simple parasitic life-forms that
include mushrooms, toadstools, yeasts,
and moulds. Disease-causing fungi can
be divided into 2 groups: filamentous
fungi and yeasts. Filamentous fungi are
made up of branching threads known as
FUNGI FROZEN SHOULDER
Fhyphae, which form a network called a
mycelium. Mushrooms and toadstools
are the reproductive structures (known
as fruiting bodies) of a filamentous fun-
gus that has spread in dead matter or
soil. Yeasts are single-celled organisms.
Most fungi are either harmless or
beneficial to human health, but some
can cause illness and disease. The fruit-
ing bodies of some fungi contain toxins
that can cause poisoning if eaten (see
mushroom poisoning). Certain fungi in-
fect food crops and produce toxins that
can cause food poisoning. The best
known of these is a fungus that infects
cereals and produces ergot, a toxin that
constricts blood vessels; and another
that grows on peanuts and produces
aflatoxin, a poison and  carcinogen. The
inhaled spores of some fungi can cause
allergic  alveolitis,  a persistent allergic
reaction in the lungs. Fungal spores are
sometimes responsible for other allergic
disorders such as allergic  rhinitis  and
asthma. Some fungi are able to invade
and form colonies in the lungs, in the
skin, or sometimes in various different
tissues throughout the body, leading to
conditions that range from mild irrita-
tion to severe, even fatal, widespread
infection (see  fungal infections) and ill-
ness. (See also candidiasis.)
fungicidal A term describing the ability
to kill fungi (see antifungal drugs).
funny-bone A popular term for the small
area at the back of the elbow where the
ulnar nerve passes over a prominence
of the humerus (upper-arm bone). A
blow to the nerve causes acute pain,
numbness, and a tingling sensation in
the forearm and hand.
242
furosemide A  diuretic drug used to
treat  oedema and  heart failure. When
given by injection, it has a rapid effect. 
furuncle Another name for a boil.
fusidic acid A type of  antibiotic drug.
used to treat bacterial infections that
are resistant to penicillin drugs. Fusidic
acid is commonly used in preparations
applied to the skin, eye, and ear.
FUNGICIDAL FUSIDIC ACID
F
Cytoplasm
Nucleus Hypha
FILAMENTOUS
FUNGUS
FUNGI
Mitochondrion
Septum
Air
space Hypha
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
MitochondrionCell
wall
HYPHAE YEAST CELL243
G6PD deficiency An X-linked disorder
that affects the chemistry of red blood
cells, making them prone to damage by
infectious illness or certain drugs or foods.
Red blood cells are missing G6PD (the
enzyme glucose 6 phosphate dehydroge-
nase). The disorder most often affects
southern European and black men.
Women are unaffected but can carry the
abnormal gene.
Some antimalarial drugs and antibiotics
can precipitate destruction of red cells
in affected people. In one form of G6PD
deficiency called favism, affected people
are sensitive to a chemical in broad
beans, which they must avoid eating.
After taking a precipitating drug or food,
or during an infectious illness, a person
with G6PD deficiency develops the
symptoms (see anaemia, haemolytic). 
G6PD deficiency is diagnosed with a
blood test. There is no particular treat-
ment but symptoms caused by a drug
or food can be relieved by avoiding it.
GABA The abbreviation for gamma-
aminobutyric acid, a  neurotransmitter.
GABA controls the flow of nerve impulses
by blocking the release of other neuro-
transmitters (e.g.  noradrenaline and
dopamine) that stimulate nerve activity.
GABA activity is increased by  benzodi-
azepine drugs and anticonvulsants.
gabapentin An anticonvulsant drug used
either alone or with other anticonvul-
sants  to treat some types of  epilepsy.
Common side effects include dizziness,
unsteadiness, and fatigue. 
galactorrhoea Spontaneous, persistent
production of milk by a woman who is
not pregnant or lactating (see lactation),
or, very rarely, by a man. 
Lactation is initiated by a rise in the
level of prolactin, a hormone produced
by the pituitary gland. Galactorrhoea is
caused by excessive secretion of pro-
lactin due to a pituitary tumour or other
endocrine disease, such as  hypothy-
roidism. Some  antipsychotic drugs may
also cause excessive secretion.Treat-
ment with  bromocriptine suppresses
prolactin production, but the underlying
cause may also need treatment.
galactosaemia A rare, inherited condi-
tion in which the body is unable to
convert the sugar galactose into glucose
due to the absence of a liver enzyme. 
It causes no symptoms at birth, but
jaundice, diarrhoea, and vomiting soon
develop and the baby fails to gain weight.
Untreated, the condition results in liver
disease, cataract, and learning difficulties.
The diagnosis is confirmed by urine and
blood tests. The major source of galac-
tose is the milk sugar lactose. Lactose-
free milk must be used throughout life.
gallbladder A small, pear-shaped sac
situated under the liver that stores bile.
Bile, produced by the liver, passes into
the gallbladder via the hepatic and cystic
ducts. It is released into the intestine
via the common bile duct.
gallbladder cancer A rare  cancer of
unknown cause that occurs mainly in the
elderly. The cancer may cause  jaundice
and tenderness in the abdomen, but 
it is sometimes symptomless. It is usu-
ally diagnosed by  ultrasound scanning.
GALLBLADDER CANCER G6PD DEFICIENCY
G
Cystic duct 
Wall of
gallbladder
Muscle
Fibrous
tissue
LOCATION
Liver
Pancreas
Hepatic
ducts
from
liver
GALLBLADDER
Common
bile 
duct
Gallbladder
lining
G244
Treatment is by surgical removal of the
tumour, but the cancer has often spread
to the liver by the time it is detected,
making the outlook poor.
gallbladder, disorders of The princi-
pal gallbladder disorder is  gallstones,
which are common and often symptom-
less. Attempts by the gallbladder to
expel the stones can cause biliary colic.
If a gallstone becomes stuck in the gall-
bladder outlet,  acute  cholecystitis may
develop. Occasionally, this  leads to a
painful condition called empyema of the
gallbladder. If a gallbladder is empty
when a stone obstructs its outlet, it may
fill with mucus, resulting in a mucocele.
Gallbladder cancer is rare. 
gallium A metallic element whose
radioactive form is used in radionuclide
scanning to detect areas of inflamma-
tion such as those that occur in cancers,
abscesses, osteomyelitis, and sarcoidosis.
gallstones Lumps of solid matter found
in the  gallbladder, or in the  bile ducts.
Gallstones are composed mainly of
cholesterol and bile pigments from the
breakdown of red blood cells. They
develop when there is a disturbance in
the chemical composition of bile. 
Gallstones are rare in childhood and
become increasingly common with age.
Women are affected more than men.
Risk factors include a high-fat diet and
being overweight. 
Most gallstones cause no symptoms.
When symptoms do occur, they often
begin when a stone gets stuck in the
duct  leading from the gallbladder, caus-
ing  biliary colic and nausea. Gallstones
may cause indigestion and  flatulence.
Possible complications  are  cholecystitis
and bile duct obstruction.
Diagnosis is by  ultrasound scanning,
X-ray oral  cholecystography, or  cholan-
giography. Stones that are not causing
symptoms are usually left alone. In
other cases, the gallbladder and stones
may be removed by  cholecystectomy.
Ultrasonic shock waves (see  lithotripsy)
are sometimes used to shatter stones;
the fragments  pass into the bowel and
cause no furtherproblems. Drugs such
as  chenodeoxycholic acid or  ursodeoxy-
cholic acid can dissolve some stones if
given over a period of months.
gambling, pathological Chronic in-
ability to resist impulses to gamble,
resulting in personal or social problems.
gamete A sex cell, which is either the
sperm of the male or the  ovum (egg
cell) of the female.
gamete intrafallopian transfer
(GIFT) A technique for assisting  con-
ception (see  infertility), which can only
be used if a woman has normal fallopian
tubes. In GIFT, eggs are removed from
an ovary during  laparoscopy and mixed
with sperm in the laboratory before
both are introduced into a fallopian
tube. A fertilized egg may then become
implanted in the uterus.
gamma-globulin A substance pre-
pared from human blood that contains
antibodies against most common infec-
tions. (See immunoglobulin injections.)
gamolenic acid  An essential  fatty acid
found in evening primrose oil and
starflower oil (borage oil). Gamolenic
acid may be prescribed for breast ten-
derness,  premenstrual syndrome, and
eczema. Very large doses may cause
abdominal pain and loose stools.
ganciclovir An  antiviral drug that is
used to treat serious  cytomegalovirus
infection in people with an impaired or
suppressed immune system as a result
of AIDS or following organ transplan-
tation. Side effects include nausea,
diarrhoea, abdominal pain, weakness,
and bone marrow suppression. 
ganglion A group of nerve cells that have
a common function; for example,the
basal ganglia in the brain are concerned
with the control of muscular movements.
The term is also used to describe a
fluid-filled swelling associated with the
sheathof a tendon.  
gangrene Death of tissue, usually as a
result of loss of blood supply. Gangrene
may affect a small area of skin or a sub-
stantial portion of a limb. Pain is felt in
the dying tissues, but once dead they
become numb. The affected tissue turns
black. There are two types of gangrene:
dry and wet. In dry gangrene, there is
usually no infection, and the tissue 
dies because it has no blood supply.
Dry gangrene does not spread, and it
may be caused by  arteriosclerosis,  dia-
betes mellitus,  thrombosis, frostbite, or
GALLBLADDER, DISORDERS OF GANGRENE
Gan  embolism. Wet gangrene develops
when dry gangrene or a wound becomes
infected by  bacteria. The gangrene
spreads and gives off an unpleasant
smell. There may be redness, swelling,
and oozing pus around the blackened
area. A virulent type called gas gan-
grene is caused by a bacterium that
destroys muscles and produces a foul-
smelling gas. 
Treatment of dry gangrene consists of
attempting to improve the circulation
to the affected area before the tissues
die.  Antibiotic drugs can preventwet
gangrene from setting in. Amputation of
the affected  part and the surrounding
tissue is necessary. 
Ganser＊s syndrome A rare  factitious
disorder in which a person seeks, con-
sciously or unconsciously, to mislead
others about his or her mental state and
may simulate symptoms of psychosis. 
Gardnerella vaginalis A bacterium that
is often found in the vaginal discharge
of women with nonspecific vaginitis.
gargle A liquid preparation to wash and
freshen the mouth and throat. Some
gargles contain antiseptics or local anaes-
thetics to relieve sore throats.
gas-and-air A mixture of  nitrous oxide
and oxygen that is used mainly used for
temporary emergency pain relief.
gastrectomy Removal of the  stomach
(total gastrectomy) or, more commonly,
part of the stomach (partial gastrec-
tomy). Total gastrectomy is used to
treat some stomach cancers. Partial gas-
trectomy used to be a treatment for
peptic ulcers but has largely been
replaced by drug treatment. 
Possible postoperative complications
are fullness and discomfort after meals;
regurgitation of bile, which may lead to
gastritis,  oesophagitis, and vomiting of
bile; diarrhoea; and dumping syndrome.
Other complications include  malab-
sorption, which may lead to anaemia or
osteoporosis. After total gastrectomy,
patients cannot absorb vitamin B12 and
are given it in the form of injections for
the rest of their lives.
gastric erosion A break in the surface
layer of the membrane lining the stom-
ach. A break deeper than this layer is
called a gastric ulcer (see peptic ulcer).
Gastric erosions occur in some cases of
gastritis. Many erosions result from
ingestion of  alcohol,  iron tablets, or
aspirin. The physical stress of serious
illness, such as  kidney failure, or of
burns may bring on an erosion. Often
there are no symptoms, but erosions
may bleed, causing vomiting of blood or
blood in the faeces. Persistent loss of
blood may lead to  anaemia. Gastric
erosions are diagnosed by gastroscopy.
They usually heal in a few days when
they are treated with antacid drugs and
ulcer-healing drugs.
gastric ulcer See peptic ulcer.
gastrin A hormone produced by cells in
the  stomach lining. Gastrin causes the
stomach to produce more acid and
helps to propel food through the diges-
tive tract. (See also  gastrointestinal
hormones.)
gastritis Inflammation of the  stomach
lining. This may be  acute or  chronic.
Acute gastritis may be caused by irrita-
tion of the stomach lining by drugs,
usually aspirin or other NSAIDs; by alco-
hol; or by infection with a HELICOBACTER
bacterium. Severe physical stress, such
as  burns or  liver failure,  can bring on
gastritis. Chronic gastritis may be due
to prolonged irritation of the stomach
by alcohol, tobacco-smoking, or bile; by
an  autoimmune disorder that damages
the stomach lining (see anaemia, mega-
loblastic); or by degeneration of the
lining with age.
Symptoms include discomfort in the
upper abdomen, nausea, and vomiting.
In acute gastritis, the faeces may be
blackened by blood lost from the stom-
ach; in chronic gastritis, slow blood loss
may lead to anaemia (see  anaemia,
iron-deficiency). Diagnosis is made with
gastroscopy, during which a  biopsy of
the stomach lining may be performed.
Ulcer-healing drugs may be given. 
gastroenteritis Inflammation of the
stomach and intestines, usually causing
sudden upsets that last for 2 or 3 days.
Dysentery,  typhoid fever,  cholera,  food
poisoning, and  travellers＊ diarrhoea are
all forms of gastroenteritis. The illness
may be caused by any of a variety of
bacteria, bacterial  toxins,  viruses, and
other organisms in food or water. 
245
GASTROENTERITIS GANSER＊S SYNDROME
G246
Appetite loss, nausea, vomiting, cramps,
and diarrhoea are the usual symptoms.
Symptom onset and severity depends
on the cause; symptoms may be mild or
so severe that  dehydration,  shock, and
collapse occur. Mild cases usually require
rest and  rehydration therapy only. For
severe illness, treatment in hospital
may be necessary, with fluids given by
intravenous infusion. Antibiotic drugs may
be given for some bacterial infections,
but others need no specific treatment. 
gastroenterology The study of the
digestive system and the diseases and
disorders affecting it. 
gastroenterostomy Surgery to create a
connection between the  stomach and
the  jejunum, sometimes combined with
partial  gastrectomy. The operation was
formerly performed to treat duodenal
ulcer (see peptic ulcer) but is now rare. 
gastrointestinal hormones A group
of  hormones released from specialized
cells in the stomach, pancreas, and intes-
tine that control various functions of
the digestive organs.  Gastrin,  secretin,
and cholecystokinin are the best known
of these hormones. 
gastrointestinal tract The part of the
digestive system consisting of the mouth,
oesophagus, stomach, and intestine.
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
(GORD) The medical term for acid reflux.
gastroscopy Examination of the  stom-
ach using a type of endoscope inserted
through the mouth. Although the term
specifies examination of the stomach,
the oesophagus and duodenum are also
inspected during the procedure, which
is more correctly known as OGD (see
oesophagogastroduodenoscopy).Gastro-
scopy, in  which the patient is usually
sedated, is used to investigate symptoms
such as bleeding from the upper gas-
trointestinal tract and disorders of the
oesophagus, stomach, or duodenum.
Attachments to the instrument enable
a  biopsy to be taken and treatments
such as laser treatment to be carried out.
A gastroscope may also be used to ease
the passage of a gastric feeding tube
through the skin (see gastrostomy).
gastrostomy An opening in the  stom-
ach made surgically, usually connecting
the stomach to the outside so that a
feeding tube can be passed into the
stomach or small intestine. Gastrosto-
my may be performed on people who
cannot eat properly due to oesophageal
cancer (see  oesophagus, cancer of) or
who are unable to chew and swallow due
to a stroke. (See also feeding, artificial.)
Gaucher＊s disease A  genetic disorder
in which the lack of the  enzyme gluco-
cerebrosidase leads to accumulation of
a fatty substance, glucosylceramide, in
the liver, spleen, bone marrow, and,
sometimes, in the brain. It is treated by
regular injections of the missing enzyme. 
gauze An absorbent, open-weave fabric,
usually made of cotton. Sterilized gauze
is often used as a dressing for wounds. 
gavage The process of feeding liquids
through a nasogastric tube. (See feeding,
artificial.) Gavage can also refer to
hyperalimentation.
GASTROENTEROLOGY GAVAGE
G
Oesophagus
Stomach
Monitor
Endoscope
Endoscope
ROUTE OF
ENDOSCOPE
Mouth
guard
Site of
intravenous
sedation
GASTROSCOPY247
gemfibrozil A drug that lowers the
level of fats in the blood. Gemfibrozil is
usually given to people with  hyper-
lipidaemia  after dietary measures have
failed to reduce blood fat. Gemfibrozil
may cause nausea and diarrhoea, and
should not be taken by people with
kidney or liver disease.
gender identity The inner feeling of
maleness or femaleness. Gender identity
is not necessarily the same as biologi-
cal sex. It is fixed within the first 2每3
years of life and is reinforced during
puberty; once established, it cannot
usually be changed. Gender identity prob-
lems, such as transsexualism, occur when
a person has persistent feelings of dis-
comfort about his or her sexual identity. 
gene A unit of the material of heredity.
A gene corresponds to a particular area
of DNA within a chromosome. There are
about 30,000 different genes arranged
on the 23 pairs of chromosomes. These
genes control the development and
functioning of organs and body systems,
providing an ※instruction manual§ for an
individual＊s growth, survival, reproduc-
tion, and possibly also for aging and
death. Genes also play a part, together
with environmental factors, in determin-
ing a person＊s intelligence, personality,
and behaviour. 
Genes fulfil these functions by direct-
ing the manufacture of  proteins. Many
proteins have a structural or catalytic
role in the body. Others switch genes
※on§ or ※off§. The genes that make these
regulatory proteins are called control
genes. The activities of control genes
determine the specialization of cells;
within any cell some genes are active
and others idle, according to its particular
function. If the control genes are disrupt-
ed,  cells lose their specialist abilities
and multiply out of control; this is the
probable mechanism by which cancers
form (see carcinogenesis; oncogenes).
Each of a person＊s body cells contains
an identical set of genes because all the
cells are derived, by a process of division,
from a single fertilized egg, and with
each division the genes are copied to
each offspring cell (see mitosis; meiosis).
Occasionally, a fault occurs in the copy-
ing process, leading to a mutation.The
gene at any particular location on a
chromosome can exist in any of various
forms, called alleles. If the effects of an
allele mask those of the allele at the
same location on its partner chromo-
some, it is called dominant. The masked
allele is  recessive. (See also  genetic
code; inheritance.)
generalized anxiety disorder A psy-
chiatric illness characterized by chronic
andpersistent apprehension and ten-
sion that has no particular focus. There
may also be physical symptoms such as
trembling, sweating, lightheadedness,
and irritability. The condition can be
treated with  psychotherapy or with
drugs such as beta blockers, sedatives or
tranquillizers that relieve symptoms but
do not treat the underlying condition.
(See anxiety; anxiety disorders.) 
general paralysis of the insane An
outdated term used to describe the
stage of mental and physical deterior-
ation that occurs in untreated or
unsuccessfully treated syphilis.
general practice The term used in the
UK to describe the provision of personal
medical care outside a hospital setting.
The term is now more commonly known
as primary care.
generic drug A medicinal drug marketed
under its official medical name (its
generic name) rather than under a
patented brand name.
gene therapy A technique used for the
treatment of certain  genetic disorders,
such as cystic fibrosis, and certain types
of  cancer. In gene therapy, copies of a
normal gene are inserted, using genetic
engineering techniques, into the  DNA
of cells to counter the effects of a faulty
gene or to produce substances that
help fight cancer.
genetic code The inherited instructions,
contained in  genes, that specify the
activities of cells and thereby the de-
velopment and functioning of the whole
body. Each gene in a  chromosome con-
tains the coded instructions for a cell to
make a particular  protein, which may
have a specific structural or catalytic
function in the body.
The DNA that makes up genes con-
sists of 2 long intertwined strands, each
consisting of a sequence of 4 different
GENETIC CODE GEMFIBROZIL
G248
chemicals called nucleotide bases.
These 4 bases are adenine, thymine,
cytosine, and guanine (often abbreviat-
ed to A, T, C,  and G).  The sequence of
these bases along the DNA strands
makes up the genetic code. 
genetic counselling Medical guidance
offered to prospective parents based on
an assessment of the probability that a
future child would be affected by a genet-
ic disorder. This assessment is made
from individual and family medical his-
tories and, in some cases, the results of
tests such as  chromosome  analysis and
genetic probes. Genetic counselling ena-
bles people to make informed decisions
about parenthood, which may involve
the use of  techniques such as selective
termination of pregnancy or  in vitro fer-
tilization to optimize the chancesof
having a healthy child.
genetic disorders Any disorder caused,
wholly or partly, by one or more faults
in a person＊s  DNA. Genetic disorders
may be  congenital or may become ap-
parent later in life. Many of them are
familial. However, a child may be born
with a genetic disorder when there is no
previous family history. 
A genetic disorder can occur in 2 ways:
one or both parents have a defect in
their own genetic material which is then
inherited, or a  mutation occurs during
the formation of the egg or sperm cell.
Genetic disorders fall into three broad
categories:  chromosomal abnormalities,
unifactorial defects, and multifactorial
defects. In the first, a child is born with
an abnormal number of whole chromo-
somes (as in Down＊s syndrome), or extra
or missing bits of chromosomes.
Unifactorial disorders are rare, and are
caused bya single defective gene or pair
of genes. They may be sex-linked (with
the defective gene carried on one of the
sex chromosomes) or autosomal (with
the defective gene carried on one of the
other 44 chromosomes). X-linked reces-
sive disorders are the most common
type of sex-linked disorder. In these
conditions, the defective gene is on the
X chromosome. Women have 2 X chro-
mosomes in their cells; men have only
1, inherited from their mothers. When a
woman inherits 1  defective gene, its
effect is masked by thenormal gene on
her other X chromosome and she has no
outward abnormality. She is still capa-
ble of passing the gene onto her
children, and is called a carrier. Carrier
females transmit the defective gene on
average to half their sons, who are
affected, and to half their daughters,
who become carriers in turn. When a
male inherits the defective gene from
his mother, there is no normal gene on
a second X chromosome to mask it, and
he displays the abnormality. Affected
males therefore  far outnumber affected
females. They pass the defective gene to
none of their sons but to all of their
daughters, who become carriers. Haemo-
philia is a disorder of this type. 
Multifactorial disorders such as asthma
are caused by the additive effects of sev-
eral genes, along with environmental
factors; the pattern of inheritance is
less straightforward. 
genetic engineering A branch of gen-
etics concerned with the alteration of
the genetic material of an organism to
produce a desired change in the organ-
ism＊s characteristics. In practice, genetic
engineering has mainly been used to
mass-produce a variety of substances
that are useful in medicine. A gene
responsible for making a useful protein
is identified and inserted into another
cell (most often a bacterium or a yeast)
that reproduces rapidly to form a colony
of cells containing the gene. This colony
produces the protein in large amounts.
Some human hormones (notably insulin
and growth hormone) and proteins such
as factor VIII (used to treat haemophilia)
are made in this way. 
genetic fingerprinting A technique
that can be used to demonstrate rela-
tionships between people (for example
in paternity testing) or in forensic inves-
tigations to identify a criminal suspect.
DNA contains a  genetic code thatis
unique to each individual (except for
identical twins). DNA can be extracted
from a sample of a person＊s body fluids,
such as blood and semen, and analysed
to reveal differences in the code: the
※genetic fingerprint§.
genetic probe A specific fragment of
DNA that is used in laboratory tests to
GENETIC COUNSELLING GENETIC PROBE
Ggenito-urinary medicine The branch
of medicine concerned with  sexually
transmitted infections. 
genome, human The complete set of
human genetic material. The human
genome consists of 23  chromosomes,
which, together, contain about 30,000
genes. All body cells contain 2 sets of
the 23 chromosomes, one set inherited
from the father and the other from the
mother. An international research pro-
gramme, the Human Genome Project,
was launched in 1990 with the aim of
identifying all the human genes. The
first rough draft of the project was pub-
lished in 2000. 
gentamicin An  antibacterial drug given
by injection to treat serious infections
suchas  meningitis and  septicaemia.
Gentamicin can damage the kidneys or
inner ear if the dosage is not carefully
controlled. The drug is also used in eye
and ear drops but is unlikely to cause
serious side effects with this use.
gentian violet A purple dye used to
make bacteria visible under a micro-
scope. It was also used as an antiseptic.
genu valgum  The medical term for
knock-knee.
genu varum See bowleg.
geriatric medicine The medical spe-
cialty concerned with care of the elderly.
Elderly people require specialist medical
treatment because they respond differ-
ently from younger people to illness
and its treatment. Physical and mental
decline due to aging can mean that ill-
nesses are more severe in older people.
Because the liver becomes less efficient
with age, drug dosages for elderly peo-
ple need to be carefully controlled to
avoid dangerous side effects. Geriatri-
cians also help older people to cope
with everyday life following illness or
injury. (See also rehabilitation.)
germ The popular term used to des-
cribe any microorganisms that cause
disease, such as  viruses and  bacteria.
(See also germ cells.)
German measles The common name
for the viral infection rubella.
germ cell  An embryonic  cell with the
potential to develop into a  sperma-
tozoon or ovum, which, on maturity, are
called gametes. The term also describes
249
determine whether particular genetic de-
fects are present in an individual＊s DNA.
Genetic probes are mainly used in ante-
natal diagnosis of genetic disorders, and
in investigating whether  people with a
family history of a genetic disorder carry
the defective gene themselves. 
genetics The study of  inheritance, the
chemical basis by which characteristics
are determined, and the causes of the
similarities and differences among indi-
viduals of a species or between different
species. Branches of human genetics
include population genetics, which stu-
dies the relative frequency of various
genes in different races; molecular gen-
etics, which is concerned with the
structure, function, and copying of
DNA; and clinical genetics, which is
concerned with the study and preven-
tion of genetic disorders. 
genital herpes See herpes, genital.
genitalia The reproductive organs, esp-
ecially those that are external. The male
genitalia include the penis, testes (in the
scrotum),  prostate gland,  seminal vesi-
cles, and associated ducts, such as the
epididymis and vas deferens. The female
genitalia include the  ovaries,  fallopian
tubes, uterus, vagina, clitoris, vulva, and
Bartholin＊s glands.
genitalia, ambiguous A group of con-
ditions in which the external sex organs
are not clearly male or female, or in
which they appear to be those of the
opposite chromosomal sex. This may
result from an abnormality of the  sex
chromosomes or a  hormonal disorder
(see  hermaphroditism;  sex determin-
ation; adrenal hyperplasia, congenital).
genital ulcer An eroded area of skin on
the  genitalia. The most common cause
is a sexually transmitted infection, partic-
ularly  syphilis and genital herpes (see
herpes, genital).  Chancroid  and  granu-
loma inguinale are tropical bacterial
infections that cause genital ulcers.
Lymphogranuloma venereum is a viral
infection producing genital blisters. Beh-
?et＊s syndrome is a rare condition that
causes tender, recurrent ulcers in the
mouth and on the genitals. Cancer of
the penis or vulva may first appear as  a
painless ulcer with raised edges. 
genital warts See warts, genital.
GERM CELL GENETICS
G250
a gamete or any cell that is undergoing
gametogenesis (the process by which
gametes are formed).
germ cell tumour A growth comprised
of immature  sperm cells in the male
testis or of immature ova in the female
ovary. A seminoma is one type of germ
cell tumour (see testis, cancer of). 
gerontology The study of  aging.(See
also geriatric medicine.)
Gestalt theory A school of psychology
that emphasizes viewing things as a
whole rather than breaking them down
into collections of stimuli and responses.
Gestalt therapy aims to increase self-
awareness by looking at all aspects of
an individual in his or her environment.
gestation The period of about 9 months
from  conception  to birth,  during which
the infant develops in the  uterus. (See
also embryo; fetus; pregnancy.)
gestational diabetes  Diabetes that
develops for the first time during preg-
nancy, usually clearing up after delivery.
(See diabetic pregnancy.)
gestodene A  progestogen drug used
with the oestrogen drug ethinylestradiol
in low-strength combined  oral contra-
ceptives. Gestodene is reported to have
a slightly higher risk of venous  throm-
boembolism than older drugs.
giant cell arteritis An alternative name
for temporal arteritis.
giardiasis An infection of the small
intestine caused by the protozoan para-
site GIARDIALAMBLIA. Giardiasis is spread
by eating or drinking
food or water that
is contaminated or
by way of direct
contact with some-
one who is infected.
Most of those in-
fected do not have
symptoms. If, how-
ever,  symptoms do
occur, they begin
1每3 days after in-
fection and include
diarrhoea and wind.
The faeces of those
infected tend to be
highly foul-smelling,
greasy, and float.
Abdominal discom-
fort, cramps, and swelling, loss of appe-
tite, and nausea may also occur. In some
cases, giardiasis becomes chronic.
Infection is diagnosed from examina-
tion of a faecal sample or by a  jejunal
biopsy. Acute giardiasis usually clears up
without treatment, but the drug metro-
nidazole quickly relieves symptoms and
prevents the spread of infection. 
giddiness See dizziness.
GIFT See gamete intrafallopian transfer.
gigantism Excessive growth (especially
in height), resulting from overprod-
uction of  growth hormone during
childhood or adolescence by a tumour
of the pituitary gland (see  pituitary
tumours). Untreated, the tumour may
compress other hormone-producing
cells in the pituitary gland, causing
symptoms of hormone deficiency (see
hypopituitarism). The condition may be
treated with drugs such as  bromo-
criptine that block the release of growth
hormone, or by surgery or radiotherapy
to remove or destroy the tumour. See
also acromegaly. 
Gilbert＊s disease A common inherited
condition that affects the way in which
bilirubin is processed by the liver. Usually
there are no symptoms, but  jaundice
may be brought on by an unrelated ill-
ness. Sufferers are otherwise healthy.
No treatment is necessary. 
Gilles de la Tourette＊s syndrome A
rare, inherited neurological disorder. It
starts in childhood with repetitive gri-
maces and tics. Involuntary barks, grunts,
or other noises may appear as the dis-
ease progresses. In some cases, the
sufferer has episodes of issuing foul
language. The syndrome is more com-
mon in males. It is usually of lifelong
duration, but  antipsychotic drugs can
help in some cases.
gingiva The Latin name for the gums.
gingival hyperplasia See hyperplasia,
gingival. 
gingivectomy The surgical removal of
part of the  gum margin. Gingivectomy
may be used to treat severe cases of
gingival hyperplasia or to remove pock-
ets of infected gum in advanced cases
of periodontitis.
gingivitis Inflammation of the  gums.
Gingivitis is a reversible stage of gum
GERM CELL TUMOUR GINGIVITIS
G
GIARDIASIS
GIARDIA LAMBLIA
Giardia
parasite
Lining of small
intestinegland A group of specialized  cells that 
manufacture and release chemical sub-
stances, such as hormones and enzymes,
into the body. There are two main types
of glands: endocrine and exocrine.
Endocrine glands do not have ducts and
release their secretions directly intothe
bloodstream; examples include the
pituitary, thyroid, and adrenal glands.
Exocrine glands have ducts and release
their secretions either on to the surface
of the skin (sebaceous glands) or into a
hollow structure such as the mouth or
digestive tract (salivary glands). 
Lymph nodes are sometimes referred
to as glands, particularly when they are
enlarged (see  glands, swollen). Strictly
speaking, this is incorrect usage because
lymph nodes do not secrete chemical
substances.
glanders An infection of horses caused
by the bacterium PSEUDOMONASMALLEI.
In rare cases, it is transmitted to
humans, causing symptoms  including
fever and general  aches and pains.
Ulcers may develop  where  bacteria
entered the skin; if bacteria enters the
lungs,  pneumonia may occur. In severe
cases,  septicaemia may follow. Treat-
ment is with antibiotics.
glands, swollen Enlargement of the
lymph nodes as a result of inflammation
and/or proliferation of white blood cells
within them. Swollen lymph nodes are a
common symptom, especially in chil-
dren, and are usually caused by a minor
infection or an allergic reaction (see
allergy). Rarer causes include Hodgkin＊s
disease and other forms of lymphoma.
glandular fever See  infectious mono-
nucleosis.
glans The head of the penis.
251
disease and is usually the result of a
build-up of  plaque around the base of
the teeth.  Toxins produced by bacteria
in the plaque irritate the gums, causing
them to become infected, swollen, ten-
der, and red-purple in colour. Gingivitis
can also result from injury to the 
gums, usually through rough tooth-
brushing or flossing. Pregnant women
and people with  diabetes mellitus are
especially susceptible.
Good oral hygiene is the main means
of preventing and treating gingivitis.
Untreated, it may damage gum tissue,
which may lead to chronic periodontitis.
Acute ulcerative gingivitis may developin
people with chronic gingivitis, especi-
ally those with lowered resistance to
infection (see gingivitis, acute ulcerative).
gingivitis, acute ulcerative Painful
infection and ulceration of the  gums
due to abnormal growth of bacteria that
usually exist harmlessly in small num-
bers in gum crevices. Predisposing factors
include poor  oral hygiene, smoking,
throat infections, and emotional stress.
In many cases the disorder is preceded
by gingivitis or periodontitis. The condi-
tion is uncommon, primarily affecting
people aged 15每35.
The gums become sore and bleed at
the slightest pressure. Crater-like ulcers
develop on the gum tips between teeth,
and there may be a foul taste in the
mouth, bad breath, and swollen lymph
nodes. Sometimes, the infection spreads
to the lips and cheek lining (see noma).
A  hydrogen peroxide mouthwash can
relieve the inflammation. Scaling is then
performed to remove plaque. In severe
cases, the antibacterial drug metronida-
zole may be given to control infection.
gingivostomatitis Widespread inflam-
mation of the mouth and gums, most
often due to a viral infection, particu-
larly herpes simplex. The condition can
also be due to a bacterial infection or
an adverse reaction to a prescribed
drug. (See also cold sore.)
ginkgo An extract from the maidenhair
tree GINKGOBILOBA, claimed to be helpful
in circulatory disorders, reduced circu-
lation in the brain, senility, depression,
and premenstrual syndrome. Possible
side effects are spasms and cramps.
GLANS GINGIVITIS, ACUTE ULCERATIVE
G
GINKGO BILOBA LEAVES
GINKGO252
and vomiting may occur, and the eye
may be red with a dilated pupil. 
Congenital glaucoma is due to an ab-
normality in the drainage angles of the
eyes before birth. Glaucoma can also be
caused by eye injury or a serious eye dis-
ease such as uveitis or lens dislocation.
Applanation tonometry is used to check
for glaucoma by measuring the pressure
within the eye. An ophthalmoscope may
show depression of the head of the
optic nerve due to the increase in pres-
sure. Visual field testing will be needed
to assess whether vision has already
been damaged, because longstanding
or severe glaucoma can result in loss of
peripheral vision (see tunnel vision).
Prompt treatment is essential to pre-
vent permanent loss of vision. Chronic
simple glaucoma can usually be con-
trolled with eye-drops (e.g.  timolol) or
tablets that reduce pressure in the eye.
Treatment needs to be continued for life.
If drugs are ineffective, surgery may be
needed to unblock the drainage chan-
nel or create an artificial channel. Acute
glaucoma requires emergency drug treat-
ment, often in hospital. Surgery, usually
iridectomy, may be necessary to prevent
a further attack.
glibenclamide An oral hypoglycaemic
drug (see hypoglycaemics, oral) used to
treat type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
gliclazide An  oral hypoglycaemic drug
(see hypoglycaemics, oral) used to treat
type 2 diabetes mellitus in conjunction
with dieting. Side effects are usually mild. 
glioblastoma multiforme A fast-
growing and highly cancerous type of
primary  brain tumour. Glioblastoma
multiforme is a type of glioma that often
develops in the cerebrum. The cause is
unknown. Treatment may include sur-
gery, radiotherapy, and/or chemotherapy.
glioma A type of  brain tumour arising
from the supporting connective tissue,
(glial cells), in the brain. Types of
glioma include astrocytoma, glioblastoma
multiforme,  ependymoma,medulloblas-
toma, and oligodendroglioma. Symptoms,
diagnosis, and treatment are as for
other types of brain tumour.
glipizide An oral hypoglycaemic drug
(see hypoglycaemics, oral) used to treat
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Side effects are
GLASSES GLIPIZIDE
G
glasses Optical devices that use lenses
to correct focusing errors in the eyes to
achieve clear vision. Lenses are made of
glass or plastic, and the shape and
thickness are chosen during a vision test.
Convex lenses are needed for hypermet-
ropia (longsightedness), and concave
lenses for  myopia  (shortsightedness).
Tinted lenses protect the eyes from sun-
light. (See also bifocal; contactlenses) 
glass eye See eye, artificial.
glass test A test for  meningitis that
involves pressing a clear glass against a
rash. If the rash remains visible, it may
be a form of purpura, which sometimes
occurs in meningitis.
glaucoma A condition in which the
pressure of the fluid in the eye is abnor-
mally high, causing the compression
and obstruction of the small blood ves-
sels that nourish the  retina. This may
result in nerve fibre destruction and
gradual loss of vision.
The most common form of glaucoma
is chronic simple (open-angle) glauco-
ma, which rarely occurs before age 40
and often causes no symptoms until
visual loss is advanced. It is caused by a
gradual blockage of the outflow of aque-
ous humour over a period of years,
causing a slow rise in pressure. The
condition tends to run in families.
In acute (closed-angle) glaucoma, there
is a sudden obstruction to the outflow
of aqueous humour from the eye and
the pressure rises suddenly. This causes
a severe, dull pain in and above the eye,
fogginess of vision, and the perception
of haloes around lights at night. Nausea
GLASS TEST
Rash visible through glassglomerulosclerosis Scarring caused by
damage to the glomeruli (see glomerulus).
Mild glomerulosclerosis occurs normally
with age. Glomerulosclerosis may occur
in some severe types of glomeruloneph-
ritis. It is also sometimes associated
with  diabetes mellitus,hypertension,
AIDS, or intravenous drug abuse.
glomerulus A filtering unit of the kidney
that consists of a cluster of capillaries
enclosed in a capsule and supplied with
blood from the renal artery. Each glom-
erulus is a part of a larger filtering unit
called a nephron. Filtered blood eventu-
ally leaves the kidney via the renal vein.
(See also glomerulonephritis.)
glomus tumour A small, bluish swel-
lingin  the skin, usually on a finger or
toe near or under the nail, which is ten-
der to touch and more painful if the
limb is hot or cold. The cause is over-
growth of the nerve structures that
normally control blood flow and tem-
perature in the skin. The tumours are
harmless but are surgically removed.
glossectomy Removal of all or part of
the  tongue. Glossectomy may be per-
formed to treat tongue cancer.
glossitis Inflammation of the  tongue.
The tongue feels sore and swollen and
looks red and smooth; adjacent parts of
the mouth may also be inflamed.
253
GLOSSITIS GLOBULIN
G
usually mild and infrequent, but dizzi-
ness and drowsiness mayoccur. Rarely,
glipizide can cause  an abnormal reac-
tion of the skin to sunlight and can
reduce blood sodium levels.
globulin Any of a group of proteins that
are insoluble in  water but soluble in
dilute salt solutions. There are a number
of globlulins in the blood, including  im-
munoglobulins (also called antibodies).
globus hystericus A condition in which
there is an uncomfortable feeling of a
※lump in the throat§. This lump is felt to
interfere with swallowing and breathing,
although there is no physical basis for
the condition. In severe cases,  hyper-
ventilation and symptoms of a  panic
attack ensue. In most cases, the condi-
tion occurs most commonly in people
who are anxious or depressed. Treat-
ment is by reassurance, breath-control
training, or psychotherapy.
glomerulonephritis Inflammation of
the glomeruli (see glomerulus), affecting
both kidneys. Damage to the glomeruli
hampers the removal of waste products,
salt, and water from the bloodstream,
which may cause serious complications. 
Some types of glomerulonephritis are
caused by immune complexes (compon-
ents of the  immune system produced in
response to infection) becoming trapped
in the glomeruli. The condition occurs
in some  autoimmune disorders. Infec-
tious diseases such as  malaria and
schistosomiasis are important causesof
glomerulonephritis in tropical countries.
Mild glomerulonephritis may produce
no symptoms. Some sufferers experience
a dull ache over the kidneys. The urine
may become bloodstained. Loss of pro-
tein into the urine may cause  oedema
(see nephrotic syndrome). Hypertension
is a potentially serious complication.
Long-term glomerulonephritis is a com-
mon cause of chronic kidney failure. 
Diagnosis involves kidney function tests,
urinalysis, and kidney biopsy. Treatment
depends on the cause and severity of
the disease. Children with nephrotic
syndrome usually respond to  cortico-
steroid drugs. In adults, kidney failure
can sometimes be prevented or delayed
by drug treatment and dietary control to
reduce the work of the kidneys.
Glomerular
capsule
Capillaries
Renal
cortex
GLOMERULUS
Ureter
Renal vein
GLOMERULUS
KIDNEY
Renal artery
Renal pelvis254
Glossitis occurs in various forms of
anaemia and in  vitamin B  deficiency.
Other causes include infection of the
mouth (especially by  herpes simplex),
irritation by dentures, and excessive use
of alcohol, tobacco, or spices. Treat-
ment is for the underlying cause.
Rinsing of the mouth with a salt solu-
tion and good oral hygiene may help.
glossolalia Speaking in an imaginary
language that has no actual meaning or
syntax. (See also neologism.) 
glossopharyngeal nerve The ninth
cranial nerve. This nerve performs both
sensory and motor functions. It conveys
sensations, especially taste, from the
back of the  tongue, regulates secretion
of saliva by the parotid gland, and con-
trols movement of the throat muscles. 
glottis The part of the  larynx that con-
sists of the vocal cords and the slit-like
opening between them. 
glucagon A  hormone that stimulates
the breakdown of stored  glycogen into
glucose and is released by the pancreas
when the blood level of glucose is low. 
Glucagon is used as an injected drug
in the emergency treatment of people
with  diabetes mellitus who are uncon-
scious as a result of low blood glucose.
Nausea and vomiting are occasional
adverse effects.
glucocorticoids Hormones produced by
the cortex of the  adrenal glands that
affect carbohydrate metabolism by in-
creasing the blood sugar level and are
also involved in the body＊s response to
physical stress. The main glucocorticoid
is hydrocortisone.
glucosamine A molecule that occurs
naturally as a component of various
substances in the body, including colla-
gen. Glucosamine is also sold as a food
supplement and is recommended to
relieve symptoms of arthritis.
glucose A simple sugar that is naturally
present in fruits and is a product of 
the digestion of starch and sucrose. It is
the chief source of energy for the body
and is carried to all tissues in the
blood. The term blood sugar refers to
glucose in the bloodstream.
The level of glucose in the blood is
normally kept fairly constant by the
actions of various  hormones, notably
insulin,  glucagon,  adrenaline,  cortico-
steroid hormones, and growth hormone.
An abnormally high blood glucose level
(known as  hyperglycaemia) may cause
glucose to be lost into the urine. An
abnormally low blood glucose level is
called hypoglycaemia.
glue ear Accumulation of fluid in the
cavity of the  middle ear, causing im-
paired hearing. Persistent glue ear is
most common in children. It is often
accompanied by enlarged adenoids and
frequently occurs with viral respiratory
tract infections, such as the common
cold. Usually both ears are affected. The
lining of the middle ear becomes over-
active, producing large amounts of
sticky fluid, and the  eustachian tube
becomes blocked so that the fluid
cannot drain away. The accumulated 
fluid interferes with the movement of
the delicate bones of the middle ear.
Glue ear is sometimes first detected by
hearing tests. Examination with an oto-
scope can confirm the diagnosis. In mild
cases, the condition often clears up with-
out specific treatment. If the condition
persists, it may be necessary to insert
grommets, which allow air into the mid-
dle ear and encourage fluid to drain.
Adenoidectomy may also be required.
glue-sniffing See solvent abuse.
glutaraldehyde A  topical preparation
for the treatment of warts, particularly
plantar warts. Glutaraldehyde may cause
a rash or irritation and may stain the
skin brown.
gluten A combination of gliadins and
glutenins (types of proteins) formed when
certain cereal flours (notably wheat flour)
are mixed with water. Sensitivity to
gluten causes coeliac disease.
gluten enteropathy See coeliac disease.
gluten intolerance See coeliac disease.
gluteus maximus The large, powerful
muscle in each of the buttocks that
gives them their rounded shape. The glu-
teus maximus is responsible for moving
the thigh sideways and backwards. 
glycerol A colourless syrupy liquid that
has a sweet taste. Glycerol is prepared
from fatsandoils; it is an essential con-
stituent of triglycerides (simple fats). 
In rectal suppositories, glycerol relieves
constipation by softening hard faeces.
GLOSSOLALIA GLYCEROL
G255
Glycerol is used in moisturizing creams.
It is also used in eardrops to soften ear-
wax and in  cough remedies to help
soothe a dry, irritating cough.
glyceryl trinitrate A  vasodilator drug
used to treat and prevent symptoms of
angina pectoris. High doses may cause a
headache, flushing, and dizziness. 
glycogen The main form of carbohydrate
stored in the body, found mainly in the
liver and in muscles. When there is too
much glucose in the blood, the excess
is converted to glycogen by the action
of  insulin  and  corticosteroidhormones.
When the blood glucose level is low, gly-
cogen is converted back to glucose (a
process regulated by adrenaline and gluc-
agon) and released into the bloodstream.
glycosuria The presence of  glucose in
the urine. Glycosuria results from failure
of the kidneys to reabsorb glucose back
into the bloodstream after the blood
has been filtered. This may be due to
hyperglycaemia, as in diabetes mellitus,
or may occur if the kidney tubules have
been damaged. However, glycosuria is
usually only significant if accompanied
by a high blood glucose level. Glyco-
suria often occurs during pregnancy
when the blood glucose level is normal.
Glycosuria is diagnosed by  urinalysis.
Treatment depends on the cause.
glycosylated haemoglobin A form of
haemoglobin that is bound to the sugar
glucose. In most people, 3每8 per cent of
haemoglobin is glycosylated. In people
with diabetes mellitus, the level of glyco-
sylated haemoglobin may be raised if
treatment has not kept the blood glu-
cose level within the normal range.
Glycosylated haemoglobin levels indi-
cate blood glucose levels over the
preceding 3 months.
goitre Enlargement of the thyroid gland,
visible as a swelling on the neck. The
thyroid gland may enlarge (without any
disturbance of its function) at puberty,
during pregnancy, or as a result of tak-
ing oral contraceptives. In many parts of
the world the main cause of a goitre is
lack of  iodine in the diet. A condition
called toxic goitre develops in  Graves＊
disease and in other forms of hyperthy-
roidism that lead to  thyrotoxicosis. A
goitre is also a feature of different types
of  thyroiditis. Other causes include a
tumour or nodule in the gland and, in
rare cases, thyroid cancer. 
A goitre can range in size from a barely
noticeable lump to a large swelling, de-
pending on the cause. Large swellings
may press on the oesophagus or trachea,
making swallowing or breathing difficult. 
A goitre not caused by disease may
eventually disappear. Goitre due to iodine
deficiency can be treated by dietary mea-
sures.  When a goitre is the result of
disease, treatment is for the underlying
disorder. Large goitres can be treated
surgically (see thyroidectomy). 
gold An antirheumatic drug used to treat
severe rheumatoid arthritis and, occasion-
ally, arthritis arising as a complication
of psoriasis. It is given either as regular
injections or orally (see  auranofin). A
common adverse effect is  dermatitis.
Gold may damage the kidneys, liver,
and bone marrow and may cause loss of
appetite, nausea, and diarrhoea.
golfer＊s elbowA painful condition caused
by inflammation of the epicondyle (bony
prominence) on the inner elbow, at the
site of attachment of some forearm mus-
cles. Golfer＊s elbow is caused by overuse
of these muscles, which bend the wrist
and fingers. Activities such as using a
screwdriver or playing golf with a faulty
grip can cause the condition. Treatment
consists of resting the elbow, applying
ice-packs, and taking analgesic drugs to
relieve pain. If the pain is severe or per-
sistent, injection of a corticosteroid drug
into the area may help.
GOLFER＊S ELBOW GLYCERYL TRINITRATE
G
GOITRE
Swelling due to enlarged
thyroid gland (goitre)256
gonadorelin The hormone released by
the  hypothalamus that stimulates the
pituitary gland to secrete the  gonado-
trophin hormones follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hor-
mone (LH).
Gonadorelin can be given by injection
and is used to investigate suspected
disease of the hypothalamus and also
to stimulate the ovaries in the treatment
of infertility. Synthesized gonadorelins
(known as gonadorelin analogues) are
used to treat endometriosis and hormone-
dependent cancers including  breast
cancer and prostate cancer. 
gonadotrophin hormones Hormones
that stimulate cell activity in the ovaries
and  testes. Gonadotrophins are essen-
tial for fertility. The two most important
gonadotrophins are follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hor-
mone (LH), which are secreted by the
pituitary gland. Another gonadotrophin,
HCG (see  gonadotrophin, human chori-
onic), is produced by the placenta
during pregnancy. Certain gonadotro-
phins are used as drugs in the
treatment of infertility.
gonadotrophin, human chorionic A
hormone produced by the  placenta in
early pregnancy. Human chorionic gon-
adotrophin (HCG) stimulates the ovaries
to produce oestrogen and progesterone,
which are needed for a healthy preg-
nancy. HCG is excreted in the urine, and
its presence in urine is the basis of
pregnancy tests on urine samples.
gonads The sex glands 每 the  testes in
men and the ovaries in women. 
gonorrhoea One of the most common
sexually transmitted infections. Gonorrh-
oea, caused by the bacterium NEISSERIA
GONORRHOEAE, is most often transmit-
ted during sexual activity, including oral
and anal sex. An infected woman may
also transmit the disease to her baby
during childbirth.
Gonorrhoea has an incubation period
of 2每10 days. In men, symptoms include
a discharge from the  urethra and pain
on passing urine. Many infected women
have no symptoms; if symptoms are
present, they usually consist of vaginal
discharge or a burning sensation on
passing urine. Infection acquired by
anal sex can cause gonococcal proctitis.
Oral sex with an infected person may
lead to gonococcal pharyngitis. A baby
exposed to infection during its birth
may acquire the eye infection gonoc-
occal ophthalmia.
Untreated gonorrhoea may spread to
other parts of the body. In men, it may
cause  prostatitis or  epididymo-orchitis,
affecting fertility. In women, untreated
gonorrhoea results in  pelvic inflamma-
tory disease, causing damage to the
fallopian tubes. This increases the risk of
ectopic pregnancy and may lead to
infertility. Gonococcal bacteria in the
bloodstream may result in  septicaemia
or septic arthritis.
Tests are performed on a sample of
discharge or on swabs taken from the
urethra,  cervix, or  rectum in order to
confirm the diagnosis. Gonorrhoea is
treated with antibiotic drugs.
Goodpasture＊s syndrome A rare auto-
immune disorder causing  inflammation
of the glomeruli in the kidney (see
glomerulus) and the alveoli in the lungs,
and  anaemia. It is a serious disease;
unless treated early it may lead to life-
threatening bleeding into the lungs and
progressive kidney failure. The disease is
most common in young men, but can
develop at  any age and in women.
Sometimes, it responds to treatment
with  immunosuppressant drugs and
plasmapheresis. People who have severe
or repeated attacks require dialysis and,
eventually, a kidney transplant.
GORD The abbreviation for gastro-oes-
ophageal reflux disease (see acid reflux).
goserelin A synthetic drug chemically
related to the hypothalmic hormone
gonadorelin. Goserelin is used to treat
breast cancer and  prostate cancer,
fibroids, infertility, and  endometriosis.
Adverse effects include loss of bone
density after prolonged application.
gout A common metabolic disorder that
causes attacks of  arthritis, usually in a
single joint (most commonly the base
of the big toe). Gout is due to high lev-
els of uric acid in the blood (see
hyperuricaemia); the arthritis is due to
the deposition of uric acid crystals in
joint tissue. The affected joint is red,
swollen, and tender. Attacks last a few
GONADORELIN GOUT
Gtissues. Graft-versus-host (GVH) disease
may occur soon after transplantation or
appear some months later. The first
sign is usually a skin rash. This may be
followed by diarrhoea, abdominal pain,
jaundice,  inflammation of the eyes and
mouth, and breathlessness.
GVH disease can usually be prevented
by administration of  immunosuppres-
sant drugs. If the disease develops, it
can be treated with corticosteroid drugs
and immunosuppressant drugs such as
ciclosporin In some cases, however, it
can be difficult to control.
Gram＊s stain An iodine-based stain that
is used to differentiate between types of
bacterium. 
grand mal A type of epileptic seizure
(see epilepsy) in which the sufferer falls
unconscious and  has generalized jerky
muscle contractions.  The seizure may
last for a few minutes; the person may
have no recall of it on awakening. 
granulation tissue A mass of red,
moist, granular tissue that develops on
the surface of an ulcer or open wound
during the process of healing.
granulocyte A type of white blood cell.
granuloma An aggregation of cells of a
type associated with chronic  inflamma-
tion. They usually occur as a reaction to
certain infections, such as  tuberculosis,
or a foreign body, such as a suture, but
they may develop for unknown reasons
in conditions such as sarcoidosis. 
A pyogenic granuloma is an excess of
granulation tissue developing at the
site of an injury to the skin or mucous
membrane. (See also  granuloma annu-
lare; granuloma inguinale.)
granuloma annulare A harmless skin
condition characterized by a circular,
raised area of skin, which spreads out-
wards to form a ring. The disorder occurs
most commonly in children, usually on
the hands. The cause is unknown. No
treatment is necessary. In most cases,
the affected skin heals completely over
a period of several months or years.
granuloma inguinale A sexually trans-
mitted infection that causes ulceration
of the genitals. The infection is caused
by  CALYMMATOBACTERIUM GRANULOMATIS,
also known as Donovan＊s bodies. Gran-
uloma inguinale is common in parts of
257
days and often recur. They are some-
times accompanied by fever. Gout may
be associated with kidney stones (see
calculus, urinary tract), and affects 10
times more men than women. In men, it
occurs any time after puberty; in women
it usually occurs after the  menopause.
The condition tends to run in families.
The diagnosis is confirmed by tests on
blood or fluid from the affected joint to
measure uric acid levels. Pain and in-
flammation can usually be controlled
by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
or  colchicine.  If these are ineffective, a
corticosteroid may be injected into the
joint. Long-term treatment with drugs
such as  allopurinol or  probenecid can
stop or reduce the frequency of attacks.
grafting The process of transplanting
healthy tissue from one part of the body
to another (autografting), from one per-
son to another (allografting), or from an
animal to a person (xenografting). 
Grafting is used to repair or replace
diseased, damaged, or defective tissues
or organs. The most common operations
of this type are  skin graft,  bone graft,
bone marrow transplant,  corneal graft,
kidney transplant, heart transplant,  liver
transplant,  heart每lung transplant,  heart-
valve surgery,  and  microsurgery on
blood vessels and nerves. 
With autografting, the grafted tissue is
usually assimilated well into the sur-
rounding tissue at the new site. The
general risks of tissue rejection follow-
ing other forms of grafting are
discussed in transplant surgery.
graft-versus-host disease A compli-
cation of a  bone marrow transplant in
which immunesystem cells in the trans-
planted marrow attack the recipient＊s
GRANULOMA INGUINALE GRAFTING
G
GOUT
Red, swollen
joint258
the tropics but is rare in developed
countries. The antibiotics tetracycline or
erythromycin are effective treatments.
Graves＊ disease An  autoimmune dis-
order that is characterized by toxic
goitre (an overactive and enlarged thy-
roid gland), excessive production of
thyroid hormones leading to  thyrotoxi-
cosis, and exophthalmos. 
gravida The medical term for a pregnant
woman. The term gravida is often com-
bined witha prefix to indicate the total
number of pregnancies a woman has
undergone (including the present one).
For example, a primigravida is a woman
who is pregnant for the first time. 
gray An SI unit of radiation dosage (see
radiation unit).
greenstick fracture A type of fracture
that occurs when a long bone in the
arm or the leg bends and cracks on one
side only. This type of fracture occurs
only in children, whose bones are still
growing and flexible.
grey matter Regions of the central ner-
vous system  consisting principally of
closely packed and interconnected nerve
cell bodies and their branching den-
drites, rather than their filamentous
axons, which make up the white matter.
Grey matter is mostly found in the outer
layers of the  cerebrum (the main mass
of the brain and the region responsible
for advanced mental functions) and
deeper regions of the brain, such as the
basal ganglia. Grey matter also makes
up the inner core of the spinal cord. 
grief An intensely painful emotion, usu-
ally caused by loss of a loved one. (See
bereavement.) 
grip The ability of the  hand to hold
objects firmly. The hand is well adapted
for gripping, with an opposable thumb
(one that is able to touch each of the
fingers), specialized skin on the palm
and fingers to provide adhesion, and a
complex system of muscles, tendons,
joints, and nerves that enables precise
movements of the digits.
Gripping ability can be reduced by any
condition that causes muscular weak-
ness or impairment of sensation in the
palms or fingers (e.g. a  stroke or nerve
injury) or by disorders that affect the
bones or joints of the hand or wrist,
such as arthritis or a fracture. 
gripe Severe abdominal pain (see colic). 
griseofulvin A drug given orally to
treat some  fungal  infections. Griseoful-
vin is particularly useful for infections
affecting the scalp, beard, palms, soles
of the  feet, and nails. Common side
effects are headache, dry mouth, abdom-
inal pain, and photosensitivity.Long-term
treatment with the drug may cause liver
or bone marrow damage.
groin The hollow between the lower
abdomen and top of the thigh. 
groin, lump in the A swelling in the
groin, most commonly due to enlarge-
ment of a lymph node as a result of an
infection (see glands, swollen). Another
common cause is a  hernia. Rarely, in
men, an undescended testis may be the
cause (see  testis, undescended). Treat-
ment depends on the cause.
groin strain Pain and tenderness in
the  groin as a result of overstretching 
of a muscle,  typically while running or
playing sports. The  muscles commonly
affected are the adductors and the rec-
tus femoris. Groin strain is usually
treated with physiotherapy, but recovery
may be slow. 
grommet A small tube that may be
inserted through an incision in the
eardrum during surgery to treat  glue
ear, usually in children. The grommet
equalizes the pressure on both sides of
the eardrum, permitting mucus to drain
down the eustachian tube into the back
of the throat. The tubes are usually
GRAVES＊ DISEASE GROMMET
G
Grey matter
Basal ganglia
(grey matter)
White matter
Brain stem
Cerebellum
Spinal cord
SECTION THROUGH BRAIN
GREY MATTER259
allowed to fall out on their own as the
hole in the eardrum closes, 6每12
months after insertion. 
group therapy Any treatment of psy-
chological problems in which a group of
patients meets regularly with a therapist.
Interaction among group members is
considered therapeutic. Group therapy
may be useful for people with personal-
ity problems and for sufferers from
alcohol dependence,  drug dependence,
anxiety disorders, and eating disorders. 
growing pains Vague aches and pains
that occur in the limbs of children. The
pains are usually felt at night and most
often affect the calves of children aged
between 6每12. The cause of growing
pains is unknown, but they do not seem
to be related to the process of growth
itself. Growing pains are of no medical
significance and require no treatment.
Limb pain that occurs in the morning,
causes a limp, or prevents normal use
of the limb is not due to growing pains
and should be assessed by a doctor.
growth Abnormal proliferation of cells
in a localized area (see  tumour). Also,
an increase in size, usually as a result of
increasing age (see growth, childhood). 
growth, childhood The increase in
height and weight as a child develops.
The period of most rapid growth occurs
before birth. After birth, although growth
is still rapid in the first few years of life,
especially in the first year, the rate of
growth steadily decreases. Puberty marks
another major period of growth, which
continues until adult height and weight
are reached, usually at about age 16每17
in girls and 19每21 in boys.
Body shape changes during childhood
because different areas grow at different
rates. For example, at birth, the head is
already about three quarters of its adult
size; it grows to almost full size during
the first year. Thereafter, it becomes
proportionately smaller because the
body grows at a much faster rate. 
Growth can be influenced by heredity
and by environmental factors such as
nutrition and general health. Hormones
also play an important role, particularly
growth hormone, thyroid hormones, and,
at puberty, the sex hormones.
A chronic illness, such as cystic fibro-
sis, may retard growth. Even a minor
illness can slow growth briefly, although
the growth rate usually catches up when
the child recovers. In some cases, slow
growth may be the only sign that a child
is ill or malnourished, in which case it
is known as  failure to thrive. However,
short stature does not necessarily indi-
cate poor health. Abnormally rapid
growth is rare. Usually, it is a familial
trait, but it may occasionally indicate an
underlying disorder, such as a pituitary
gland tumour causing  gigantism. (See
also age; child development.)
growth factor Any of various chemicals
involved in stimulating new cell growth
and maintenance. Some growth factors,
such as vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor, which stimulates the formation of
new blood vessels, are important in the
growth and spread of cancers.
growth hormone A substance that is
produced by the  pituitary gland and
which stimulates normal body growth
and development. Growth hormone
stimulates the production of protein in
muscle cells and the release of energy
from the breakdown of fats. Oversecre-
tion of growth hormone results in
gigantism if it occurs before puberty or
acromegaly if it occurs after.
Synthetic growth hormone given by
injection may be used to treat  short
stature when the cause is a pituitary dis-
order or a genetic disorder.
GROWTH HORMONE GROUP THERAPY
G
LOCATION
Grommet
Incus
GROMMET
Middle
ear
Outer ear
canal
Inner
ear
Eardrum
Malleus
Stapes260
GTN The abbreviation for  glyceryl tri-
nitrate.
guar gum A gum extracted from the
cluster bean (CYAMOPSIS TETRAGONOLABA).
Guar gum is not digested in the body. It
is taken (as granules sprinkled on food
or dissolved in water) as an aid to con-
trolling the blood glucose level in people
with  diabetes mellitus because it slows
absorption of glucose in the small in-
testine. Guar gum may cause flatulence,
nausea, and abdominal discomfort.
Guillain每Barr谷 syndrome A rare con-
dition affecting the peripheral nerves
(see  peripheral nervous system) that
causes weakness, usually in the limbs.
The cause is believed to be an allergic
reaction to an infection, usually viral;
the nerves are damaged by  antibodies
produced by the body to eliminate the
infection. In most cases, the disease
develops 2 or 3 weeks after the onset of
infection. Weakness, often accompanied
by numbness and tingling, usually starts
in the legs and spreads to the arms. The
weakness may become progressively
worse, resulting in  paralysis. The mus-
cles of the face and those controlling
speech, swallowing, and breathing may
also be affected. 
Diagnosis of Guillain每Barr谷 syndrome
is confirmed by electrical tests to mea-
sure how fast nerve impulses are being
conducted, or by a  lumbar puncture.
Most people recover fully with only sup-
portive treatment. However, in severe
cases, treatment with plasmapheresis or
immunoglobulin may be given. Mechan-
ical  ventilation  may be needed to aid
breathing if the respiratory muscles and
diaphragm are severely affected. Some
people are left with permanent weak-
ness in affected areas and/or suffer from
further attacks of the disease. 
guilt A painful feeling that arises from
the awareness of having broken a moral
code. Guilt is self-inflicted, unlike shame,
which depends on how other people
view the  transgression. Some psycho-
analysts viewguilt as a result of the
prohibitions of the superego instilled by
parental authority in early life. Others
see guilt as a conditioned response to
actions that in the past have led to pun-
ishment. Feeling guilty for no reason or
for an imagined crime is one of the
main symptoms of psychotic depression.
Guinea worm disease A tropical dis-
ease caused by a female parasitic worm
more than 1m long. Infection is the
result of drinking water containing the
water flea cyclops, which harbours larvae
of the worm. The larvae pass through
the intestine and mature in body tissues.
After about a year, the adult female worm,
now pregnant, approaches the skin sur-
face and creates an inflamed blister that
bursts, exposing the end of the worm.
Urticaria, nausea, and diarrhoea often
develop while the blister is forming. The
disease occurs in Africa, South America,
the Caribbean, Middle East, and India. 
The traditional remedy is to wind the
worm from the skin on to a small stick.
Once the worm is out, the condition
usually clears up. The drugs  tiabenda-
zole and niridazole are given to reduce
inflammation,  antibiotics are given to
control secondary infection, and the
patient is immunized against tetanus.
Gulf War syndrome A group of symp-
toms caused by exposure of people in
the armed forces to chemicals, includ-
ing insecticides, used during the Gulf
War in 1991. Gulf War syndrome may
also be due to side effects of  vaccines
and drugs given to the armed forces to
prevent against possible attacks of
chemical and biological weapons. 
gullet Common name for the oesophagus.
gum The soft tissue surrounding the teeth
that protects underlying structures and
keeps the teeth in position in the jaw. 
Healthy gums are pink or brown and
firm. Careful oral hygiene helps prevent
gum disease.  Gingivitis may occur if
plaque is allowed to collect around the
base of the teeth. Untreated gingivitis
may lead to chronic periodontitis. Bleed-
inggums are nearly always a symptom
of gingivitis; rarely, they are due to
leukaemia or scurvy. Gingival hyperplasia
occurs most often asa side-effect of
treatment with phenytoin. 
gumboil See abscess, dental. 
gumma A soft tumour that may develop
in the late stages of untreated  syphilis.
These tumours are very uncommon in
developed countries.
gut A common name for the intestine.
GTN GUT
G261
Guthrie test A blood test performed
routinely on a heel-prick blood sample
taken from babies between the 8th and
14th day after birth to check for the
inherited disorder phenylketonuria. 
gynaecology The medical speciality
concerned with the female reproductive
tract. Gynaecology deals with  contra-
ception, the investigation and treatment
of menstrual problems (see  menstru-
ation, disorders of),  sexual problems,
infertility, problems relating to the meno-
pause, and disorders such as uterine
fibroids and ovarian cysts. Gynaecology
also covers disorders of early pregnan-
cy, such as recurrent miscarriage.
gynaecomastia Enlargement of one or
both breasts in the male, due, in some
cases, to an excess of the female sex
hormone oestrogen in the blood. 
Mild, temporary gynaecomastia can
occur at birth as a result of maternal hor-
mones, and it is common at puberty. 
Gynaecomastia developing in later life
may be due to chronic liver diseases
such as  cirrhosis. Hormone secreting
tumours such as pituitary or testicular
tumours may also be a cause.
Adult gynaecomastia, which some-
times occurs in only one breast, can
also occur when synthetic hormones and
some drugs, such as  digoxin,  spirono-
lactone, and  cimetidine, change the
balance of sex hormones. Rarely, a dis-
crete lump that develops on one breast
may be due to a male breast cancer.
Investigation may involve blood tests. If
cancer is suspected, a  biopsy will be
performed. Treatment depends on the
cause. If a drug is responsible, an alter-
native will be prescribed if possible. If
there is no underlying disease, swelling
usually subsides without treatment.
Cosmetic surgery may be considered in
severe cases (see mammoplasty). 
GYNAECOMASTIA
G
GUTHRIE TEST
COLLECTING SAMPLE FOR 
GUTHRIE TEST
GUTHRIE TEST
Test card262
H2-receptor antagonists A common
abbreviation for histamine2-receptor ant-
agonists, a group of ulcer-healing drugs.
(See also cimetidine; ranitidine; famotidine.)
habituation The process of becoming
accustomed to an experience. In general,
the more a person is exposed to a stim-
ulus, the less he or she is affected by it.
People can become habituated to certain
drugs and develop a reduced response
to their effects (see tolerance).
haem A compound thatcontains iron
and which  combines with globin to 
form haemoglobin.
haem- A prefix indicating blood.
haemangioblastoma A rare type of brain
tumour consisting of blood-vessel cells.
Haemangioblastomas develop slowly as
cysts, often in the cerebellum, and are
mostly noncancerous. Symptoms include
headache, vomiting, nystagmus and, if the
tumour is in the cerebellum, ataxia. Most
can be removed surgically.
haemangioma A birthmark caused by
abnormal distribution of blood vessels.
Types of haemangioma include  port-
wine stains, stork marks, and strawberry
naevi. They generally disappear without
leaving a scar by 5每7 years.
Haemangiomas do not usually require
treatment. However, a haemangioma
that bleeds persistently or that looks
unsightly may need to be removed, by
laser treatment, cryosurgery, radiothera-
py, embolization, or plastic surgery. 
haemarthrosis Bleeding into a  joint,
causing the capsule that encloses the
joint to swell, and resulting in pain and
stiffness. Haemarthrosis is usually the
result of severe injury to a joint. Less
common causes are bleeding disorders,
such as  haemophilia, and overuse of
anticoagulant drugs.
Ice-packs may reduce swelling and
pain. Fluid may be withdrawn for pain
relief and for diagnosis. Haemophiliacs
are given  factor VIII to promote blood
clotting. Resting the joint in an elevated
position can prevent further bleeding.
Repeated haemarthrosis may damage
joint surfaces, causing osteoarthritis.
haematemesis The medical term for
vomiting blood. 
haematology The study of  blood and
its formation, as well as the investiga-
tion and treatment of disorders that
affect the blood and the bone marrow.
haematoma A localized collection of
blood (usually clotted) that is caused by
bleeding from a ruptured blood vessel.
Haematomas can occur almost any-
where in the body and vary from a
minor to a potentially fatal condition.
Less serious types of haematoma in-
clude haematomas under the nails or in
the tissues of the outer ear (cauliflower
ear). Most haematomas disappear with-
out treatment in a few days, but if they
are painful they may be drained. More
serious types include extradural and
subdural haematomas, which press on
the brain (see  extradural haemorrhage;
subdural haemorrhage).
haematoma auris The medical term
for cauliflower ear. 
haematuria Blood in the  urine, which
may or may not be visible to the naked
eye. In small amounts, it may give the
urine a smoky appearance.
Almost any  urinary tract disorder can
cause haematuria. Urinary tract infection
is a common cause; prostatitis may be a
cause in men.  Cysts,  kidney tumours,
bladder tumours, stones (see  calculus,
urinary tract), and  glomerulonephritis
may cause haematuria.  Bleeding disor-
ders may also cause the condition.
Blood that is not visible to the naked
eye may be detected by a dipstick urine
test  or microscopic examination.  CT
scanning, ultrasound scanning, or intra-
venous urography  can help determine
the cause. If bladder disease is suspect-
ed, cystoscopy is performed. 
haemochromatosis An inherited dis-
ease in which too much dietary iron is
absorbed. Excess iron gradually ac-
cumulates in the liver, pancreas, heart,
testes, and other organs. Men are more
frequently affected because women reg-
ularly lose iron in menstrual blood.
H2-RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTSHAEMOCHROMATOSIS
H
HLoss of sex drive and a reduction in the
size of the testes are often the first signs.
Excess iron over a period of time causes
liver enlargement and cirrhosis, and can
lead to  diabetes mellitus, bronzedskin
coloration, cardiac arrhythmia, and, even-
tually, liver failure and liver cancer.
Diagnosis is based on blood tests and
a  liver biopsy. Treatment is by regular
venesection. (See also haemosiderosis.) 
haemodialysis One of the 2 means of
dialysis used to treat kidney failure. 
haemoglobin The oxygen-carrying pig-
ment that is present in red blood cells.
Haemoglobin molecules, which are pro-
duced by bone marrow, are made up of
4 protein chains (2 alpha- and 2 beta-
globin) and 4 haem (a red pigment that
contains iron).
Oxygen from the lungs enters red
blood cells in the bloodstream. The oxy-
gen then combines chemically with the
haem within the haemoglobin to form
oxyhaemoglobin, which gives blood in
the  arteries its distinctive bright red
colour and is carried around the body.
In areas that need oxygen, the oxyhaem-
oglobin releases its oxygen and reverts
to haemoglobin, giving blood in the
veins its distinctive darker colour.
Some defects in haemoglobin produc-
tion result from a genetic disorder; such
defects are subdivided into errors of
haem production, known as porphyrias,
and those of globin production, known
HAEMOGLOBIN
263
as  haemoglobinopathies. Other defects,
such as some types of anaemia, have a
nongenetic cause. 
haemoglobinopathy A term used to
describe the genetic disorders  in which
there is a fault in the production of the
globin chains of haemoglobin. Examples
of haemoglobinopathies include  sickle
cell anaemia and the thalassaemias.
haemoglobinuria The presence in the
urine of  haemoglobin. Haemoglobin is
mainly contained in red blood cells, but a
small amount is free in the blood plas-
ma. Excessive breakdown of red blood
cells, which may be due to heavy exer-
cise, cold weather, falciparum  malaria,
or haemolytic  anaemia, increases the
concentration of free haemoglobin in
the plasma. The excess haemoglobin is
excreted in the urine. 
haemolysis The destruction of red blood
cells. Haemolysis is the normal process
by which old red blood cells are
destroyed, mainly in the  spleen. Biliru-
bin, a waste product of haemolysis, is
excreted into the  bile by the liver.
Abnormal haemolysis, in which red
blood cells are destroyed prematurely,
may cause anaemia and jaundice (see
anaemia, haemolytic).
haemolytic anaemia See anaemia, hae-
molytic.
haemolytic disease of the newborn
Excessive  haemolysis (destruction of
red blood cells) in the fetus and new-
born by  antibodies produced by the
mother. Haemolytic disease of the new-
born is most often caused by  Rhesus
incompatibility. This occurs when a moth-
erwith Rh-negative type blood, who has
previously been exposed to Rh-positive
blood through birth, miscarriage, abor-
tion, or amniocentesis, is pregnant with
a baby that has Rh-positive blood.
Haemolytic disease has become un-
common since the introduction of routine
preventative treatment for Rh-negative
women during pregnancy (see  anti-D
(Rh0) immunoglobulin).
In mild cases of haemolytic disease,
the newborn baby becomes slightly jaun-
diced during the first 24 hours of life
(due to excess bilirubin in the blood)
and slightly anaemic. In more severe
cases, the level of bilirubin in the blood
HAEMOLYTIC DISEASE HAEMODIALYSIS
H
Beta-globin
chain
Haem
Iron
STRUCTURE OF HAEMOGLOBIN
Alpha-globin
chain264
may increase to a dangerous level, caus-
ing a risk of kernicterus (a type of brain
damage). Severely affected babies have
marked anaemia while still in the uterus.
They become swollen (hydrops fetalis)
and are often stillborn.
In mild cases, no treatment is neces-
sary. In other cases, the aim is to deliver
the baby before the anaemia becomes
severe, usually by  induction of labour at
35每39 weeks＊ gestation. If the baby is
too young to be delivered safely, fetal
blood transfusions may be necessary.
After birth,  phototherapy  (light treat-
ment that converts bilirubin in the skin
into a water-soluble form that is more
easily excreted from the body) can help
to reduce  jaundice. An exchange blood
transfusion may be needed. 
haemolytic每uraemic syndrome A rare
disease in which red  blood cells are
destroyed prematurely and the  kidneys
are damaged, causing acute kidney fail-
ure.  Thrombocytopenia can also occur.
Haemolytic每uraemic syndrome most
commonly affects young children and
may be triggered by a serious bacterial
or viral infection. Symptoms include
weakness, lethargy, and a reduction in
the volume of urine. Seizures may occur.
Blood and urine tests can determine
the degree of kidney damage.  Dialysis
may be needed until the kidneys have
recovered. Most patients recover nor-
mal renal function.
haemophilia An inherited bleeding dis-
order caused by deficiency of a blood
protein,  factor VIII, which is essential
for blood clotting. Haemophiliacs suffer
recurrent bleeding, usually into their
joints, which may occur spontaneously
or after injury. The lack of factor VIII is
due to a defective gene, which shows a
pattern of sex-linked inheritance; haem-
ophilia affects males in most cases. 
Episodes of bleeding are painful and,
unless treated promptly, can lead to
joint deformity. Injury, and even minor
operations such as tooth extraction,
may lead to profuse bleeding. Internal
bleeding can lead to blood in the urine
or extensive bruises. 
Haemophilia is diagnosed by  blood-
clotting tests, and by  amniocentesis or
chorionic villus sampling in a fetus.
Bleeding can be prevented or controlled
by infusions of factor VIII concentrates.
haemophilus influenzae A bacterium
(see bacteria) responsible for numerous
cases of the infectious diseases epiglot-
titis and meningitis. 
haemoptysis The medical term for cough-
ing up blood. 
haemorrhage The medical term for
bleeding. (See also haematoma.)
haemorrhoidectomy The surgical re-
moval of  haemorrhoids. The procedure
is used to treat large, prolapsing, or
bleeding haemorrhoids.
haemorrhoids Swollen veins in the
lining of the  anus. Sometimes these
veins protrude outside the anal canal,
in which case they are called prolapsing
haemorrhoids. Straining repeatedly to
pass hard faeces is one of the main
causes of haemorrhoids. Haemorrhoids
are also common during pregnancy and
just after childbirth. 
Rectal bleeding and discomfort on
defaecation are the most common fea-
tures. Prolapsing haemorrhoids often
produce a mucous discharge and itch-
ing around the anus. A complication of
prolapse is  thrombosis and  strangula-
tion; this can cause extreme pain.
Diagnosis is usually by  proctoscopy.
Mild cases are controlled by drinking
plenty of fluids, eating a high-fibre diet,
and establishing regular toilet habits.
Rectal suppositories and creams con-
taining  corticosteroid drugs and local
anaesthetics reduce pain and swelling.
More troublesome haemorrhoids may
be treated by  sclerotherapy,  cryosurg-
ery, or by banding, in which a band is
tied around the haemorrhoid, causing it
to wither and drop off. A  haemorrh-
oidectomy is generally required for
prolapsing haemorrhoids.
haemosiderosis A general increase in
iron stores in the body. Haemosiderosis
may occur after repeated blood transfu-
sions or, more rarely, as a result of
excessive intake of iron.
haemospermia The medical term for
blood in the semen (see  semen, blood 
in the).
haemostasis The arrest of  bleeding.
There are 3 main natural mechanisms
by which bleeding is stopped after
HAEMOLYTIC每URAEMIC SYNDROMEHAEMOSTASIS
H265
injury. First, small blood vessels con-
strict. Second, small  blood cells called
platelets aggregate and plug the bleed-
ing points. Third, the plasma coagulates,
forming filaments of a substance called
fibrin, which help to seal the damaged
blood vessel (see blood clotting). Defects
in any of these mechanisms can cause 
a bleeding disorder. 
haemostatic drugs A group of drugs
used to treat bleeding disorders and to
control bleeding. Haemostatic prepara-
tions that help blood clotting are given
to people who have deficiencies of nat-
ural clotting factors. For example, factor
VIII is used to treat haemophilia. Drugs
that prevent the breakdown of fibrin in
clots, such as  tranexamic acid, can also
improve haemostasis.
haemothorax A collection of blood in
the pleural cavity (see pleura). Haemo-
thorax is most commonly caused by chest
injury, but it may arise spontaneously in
people with defects of blood coagula-
tion or as a result of cancer. Symptoms
include pain in the affected side of the
chest and upper abdomen, and breath-
lessness. If extensive, there may be
partial lung collapse. Blood in the pleu-
ral cavity is withdrawn through a needle.
hair A thread-like structure composed of
dead cells containing  keratin,  a fibrous
protein. The root of each hair is embed-
ded in a tiny pit in the dermis layer of
the skin called a hair follicle. Each shaft
of hair consists of a spongy semihollow
core (the medulla), a surrounding layer
of long, thin fibres (the cortex), and, on
the outside, several layers of overlap-
ping cells (the cuticle). While a hair is
growing, the root is enclosed by tissue
called a bulb, which supplies the hair
with keratin. Once the hair has stopped
growing, the bulb retracts from the root
and the hair eventually falls out.
Hair is involved in the regulation of
body temperature (known as thermo-
regulation). If the body is too cold,
arrector pili muscles in the skin con-
tract, pulling the hairs upright to form
goose pimples. Erect hairs trap an insu-
lating layer of air next to the skin. 
Brittle hair may be due to excessive
styling,  hypothyroidism,  or severe vita-
min or mineral deficiency. Very dry hair
can be caused by malnutrition. Ingrown
hairs occur when the free-growing end
of the hair penetrates the skin near the
follicle, which may cause inflammation.
(See also hirsutism; hypertrichosis.)
hairball A ball of hair in the stomach,
found in people who nervously suck or
chew their hair (see bezoar).
hairiness, excessive See  hirsutism;
hypertrichosis.
hair removal Hair is usually removed
from the body for cosmetic reasons. It
may also be shaved from around an
incision site before surgery. Temporary
methods include shaving, waxing, dep-
ilatory creams, and waxing; electrolysis is
the only permanent method of removal.
hair transplant A cosmetic operation
in which hairy sections of scalp are
removed and transplanted to hairless
areas to treat alopecia (baldness). There
are several different techniques.
In strip grafting, a strip of skin and hair
is taken from a donor site, usually at the
back of the scalp or behind the ears. The
removed hairs and their follicles are then
inserted into numerous incisions made
in a bald area, known as the recipient site.
The procedure usually takes 60每90 min-
utes. The patient is given a mild sedative
and anaesthetic onthe donor and recipi-
ent sites. The donor site heals in about
HAIR TRANSPLANT HAEMOSTATIC DRUGS
H
Sebaceous
gland
Fat
Sweat gland
Epidermis
Hair shaft
HAIR
Dermis
Arrector pili
muscle
Hair
bulb
Hair
follicle5 days. Transplanted hairs fall out shortly
afterwards, but new hairs grow from the
follicles 3 weeks to 3 months later. 
Other transplant techniques include
punch grafting, in which a punch is used
to remove small areas of bald scalp,
which are replaced with areas of hairy
scalp; flap grafting, in which flaps of
hairy skin are lifted, rotated, and
stitched to replace bald areas; and male
pattern baldness reduction, which
involves cutting out areas of bald skin
and stretching surrounding areas of
hair-bearing scalp to replace them.
half-life The time taken for the activity
of a substance to reduce to half its
original level. The term is usually used
to refer to the time taken for the level 
of  radiation emitted by a radioactive
substance to decay to half its original
level. The concept is useful in radiother-
apy for assessing how long material will
stay radioactive in the body. Half-life is
also used to refer to the length of time
taken by the body to eliminate half the
quantity of a drug.
halitosis The medical term for bad
breath. Halitosis is usually a result of
smoking, drinking alcohol, eating garlic
or onions, or poor oral hygiene. Persis-
tent bad breath not caused by any of
these may be a symptom of mouth
infection, sinusitis, or certain lung disor-
ders, such as bronchiectasis. 
hallucination A perception that occurs
when there is no external stimulus.
Auditory hallucinations (the hearing of
voices) are a major symptom of schizo-
phrenia but may also be caused by
manic每depressive illness and certain
brain disorders. Visual hallucinations are
most often found in states of  delirium
brought on by a physical illness (such
as  pneumonia) or alcohol withdrawal
(delirium tremens). Hallucinogenic drugs
are another common cause of visual
hallucinations. Hallucinations of smell
are associated with  temporal lobe epi-
lepsy. Those of touch and taste are rare,
however, and occur mainly in people
with  schizophrenia. People subjected 
to sensory deprivation or overwhelming
physical stress sometimes suffer from
temporary hallucinations.
hallucinogenic drug A drug that caus-
es  hallucination. Hallucinogens include
certain drugs of abuse, such as  LSD,
marijuana,  mescaline, and  psilocybin.
Some prescription drugs, including
anticholinergic drugs and  levodopa,
occasionally cause hallucinations.
hallux The medical name for the big toe.
hallux rigidus Loss of movement in
the large joint at the base of the big toe
HAIRTRANSPLANT
266
HALF-LIFE HALLUX RIGIDUS
H
Area of hair removal
Recipient
site
Hair
follicle
TRANSPLANTED
HAIRS
STRIP GRAFTING TECHNIQUE
Scalpel
Incision
DONORSITE
Magnifying
glasses
Transplanted haircommon in sports. Repeated strenuous
exercise may sprain the muscles (see
overuse injury). 
hand The hand is made up of the wrist,
palm, and fingers. Movement of the hand
is achieved mainly by tendons that attach
the muscles of the forearm to the bones
of the hand (the carpals, metacarpals,
and phalanges) or by short muscles in
the palm of the hand.
The hands are highly susceptible to
injury. Dermatitis is also common. The
hand may be affected by  Dupuytren＊s
contracture or  Volkmann＊s contracture.
Degeneration of a tendon sheath on the
upper side of the wrist may cause a
harmless swelling called a  ganglion.
Osteoarthritis commonly affects the joint
at the base of the thumb.  Rheumatoid
arthritis may cause deformity.
hand每arm vibration syndrome Pain
and numbness in the hand and arm due
to prolonged use of vibrating tools.
Symptoms often also include blue or
white coloration of the fingers and a
tingling sensation in affected areas.
Hand每arm vibration syndrome tends to
develop slowly over years and is the
result of repeated damage to blood ves-
sels and nerves. Exposure to cold tends
to aggravate the condition. There is no
specific treatment, but avoiding vibrat-
ing tools is essential to prevent the
disease progressing. In some cases,
calcium channel blockers  may help
relieve some symptoms.
HAND
267
as a result of osteoarthritis. The joint is
usually tender and swollen. Treatment
of hallux rigidus comprises resting the
toe and wearing a support insert in 
the shoe. Surgery may be required.
hallux valgus A deformity of the big toe
in which the joint at the base projects
out from the foot, and the top of the toe
turns inwards. The condition is more
common in women, because it is usually
associated with wearing narrow, pointed,
high-heeled shoes, but it may be caused
by an inherited weakness in the joint. A
hallux valgus often leads  to formation
of a  bunion  or to  osteoarthritis in the
joint, causing pain and limiting  foot
movement. Severe deformity may becor-
rected by osteotomy or arthrodesis.
haloperidol An antipsychotic drug used
to treat mental illnesses such as schizo-
phrenia and mania. Haloperidol is also
given to control symptoms of Gilles de
la Tourette＊s syndrome and, in small
doses, to sedate people who are aggres-
sive as a result of dementia. Side effects
include drowsiness, lethargy, weight
gain, dizziness, and parkinsonism. 
halothane A colourless liquid inhaled as
a vapour to induce and maintain general
anaesthesia (see anaesthesia, general). 
hamartoma A noncancerous mass, re-
sembling a tumour, which consists of
an overgrowth of tissues that are nor-
mally found in the affected part of the
body. Hamartomas are common in the
skin (the most common is a  haeman-
gioma), but they also occur in the lungs,
heart, or kidneys. 
hammer-toe A deformity of the  toe
(usually the second toe) in which the
main joint stays bent due to a  tendon
abnormality. A painful corn often devel-
ops on this joint. A protective pad can
ease pressure on the joint and relieve
pain, but surgery may be needed if the
pain is persistent. 
hamstring muscles A group of muscles
at the back of the thigh. The upper ends
of the hamstring muscles are attached
by tendons to the pelvis; the lower ends
are attached by tendons called ham-
strings to the  tibia and  fibula. The
hamstring muscles bend the knee and
swing the leg backwards from the thigh.
Tearing of the hamstring muscles is
HAND每ARM VIBRATION SYNDROME HALLUX VALGUS
H
Carpals
Metacarpals
Phalanges
BONES OF THE HANDhandedness Preference for using the
right or left hand. Some 90 per cent of
adults use the right hand for writing;
two thirds prefer the right hand for
most activities requiring coordination
and skill. The others are either left-
handed or ambidextrous (able to use
both hands equally well). 
Handedness is related to the division
of the brain into 2 hemispheres, each of
which controls movement and sensa-
tion on the opposite side of the body. In
most right-handed people the speech
centre is in the left brain hemisphere.
Inheritance is probably the most impor-
tant factor in determining handedness.
hand-foot-and-mouth disease An in-
fectious disease, mainly affecting young
children, that is caused by the coxsackie-
virus. Hand-foot-and-mouth disease may
occur in small epidemics, usually in the
summer. The illness is usually mild and
lasts for only a few days. Symptoms
include blistering of the palms, soles of
the feet, and inside of the mouth, and a
slight fever. There is no treatment other
than mild analgesic drugs. The illness is
not related to foot-and-mouth disease,
which occurs in cattle.
handicap The extent to which a physi-
cal or mental  disability interferes with
normal functioning and causes the per-
son to be disadvantaged.
hangnail A strip of skin torn away from
the side or base of a fingernail, expos-
ing a raw, painful area.
hangover The unpleasant effects that can
be experienced after over-indulgence in
alcohol, characterized by headache, nau-
sea,  vertigo, and depression. Alcohol
increases production of urine, and some
of the symptoms of a hangover are due
to mild dehydration. (See also  alcohol
intoxication.)
Hansen＊s disease A chronic bacterial
infection, also called leprosy, that dam-
ages nerves, mainly in the limbs and
facial area, and may cause skin damage. 
The disease is caused by a bacterium,
MYCOBACTERIUM LEPRAE, which is spread
in droplets of nasal mucus. Hansen＊s
disease is not highly contagious, and a
person is infectious only in the early
stages. Prolonged close contact puts peo-
ple at risk. The disease is most prevalent
in Asia, Central America, South Ameri-
ca, and Africa. 
Hansen＊s disease has a long incuba-
tion period 每 about 3每5 years. There are
2 main types: the lepromatous type, in
which damage is widespread, progres-
sive, and severe; and the tuberculoid
type, which is milder. In both types,
damage is initially confined to peri-
pheral nerves supplying the skin and
muscles. Skin areas supplied by affected
nerves become lighter or darker and
sensation and sweating are reduced. As
the disease progresses, the peripheral
nerves swell and become tender. Hands,
feet, and facial skin eventually become
numb and muscles become paralysed,
leading to deformity. Other possible
features include blindness, destruction
of bone, and sterility.
The presence of the causative bacteria
is confirmed by a  skin biopsy. Drug
treatment may be with a combination 
of dapsone, rifampicin, and clofazimine,
which kills most of the bacteria in a few
days. Any damage that has occurred
before treatment, however, is irrevers-
ible.  Plastic surgery may be necessary 
to correct deformities; and nerve and
tendon transplants may improve the
function of damaged limbs.
hantavirus A viral infection that is trans-
mitted to humans through the urine or
faeces of infected rodents, such as rats.
Symptoms range from a minor flu-like
illness with headache and a sore throat
to high fever, nausea and vomiting, and
abnormal bleeding. Some strains of
hantavirus can cause severe infections
which may lead to  kidney failure, seri-
ous lung damage, and death.
hardening of the arteries The popu-
lar term for atherosclerosis.
hare lip A common term for the  birth
defect in which there is a split in the
upper lip due to failure of the 2 sides to
fuse during fetal development. A hare
lip is often associated with a similar
failure of the 2 halves of the palate to
join. (See  also cleft lip and palate.)
Hashimoto＊s thyroiditis An  autoim-
mune disorder in which the body＊s
immune system develops  antibodies
against its own thyroid gland cells. As 
a result, the thyroid gland cannot 
268
HANDEDNESS HASHIMOTO＊S THYROIDITIS
H269
produce enough  thyroid hormones, a
condition known as  hypothyroidism.
The principal symptoms of Hashimoto＊s
thyroiditis are tiredness, muscle weak-
ness, and weight gain, and the thyroid
gland becomes enlarged.
Diagnosis is confirmed by blood tests.
Treatment is by thyroid hormone replace-
ment therapy, which is life-long.
hashish Another name for marijuana.
hay fever The popular name for a sea-
sonal form of allergic rhinitis (see
rhinitis, allergic).
HDL The abbreviation for  high density
lipoprotein.
headache One of the most common
types of pain. A headache is only rarely
a symptom of a serious underlying dis-
order. The pain arises from tension in
the meninges, and in the blood vessels
and muscles of the scalp.
Many headaches are simply a resp-
onse to some adverse stimulus, such as
hunger. Such headaches usually clear
up quickly. Tension headaches, caused
by tightening in the face, neck, and scalp
muscles as a result of stress or poor
posture, are also common, and may last
for days or weeks. Migraine is a severe,
incapacitating headache preceded or
accompanied by visual and/or  stomach
disturbances.  Cluster headaches cause
intense pain behind 1 eye.
Common causes of headache include
hangover and noisy or stuffy environ-
ments.  Food additives may also be a
cause. Some headaches are due to over-
use of painkillers (see analgesic drugs).
Other possible causes include  sinusitis,
toothache,  cervical osteoarthritis, and
head injury. Among the rare causes of
headache are a  brain tumour,  hyper-
tension, temporal arteritis, an aneurysm,
and increased pressure within the skull.
Most headaches can be relieved by
painkillers and rest. If a neurological
cause is suspected, CT scanning or MRI
may be performed.
head-banging The persistent, rhythmic
banging of the head against a wall or
hard object. Head-banging is seen in
some people with severe  learning dif-
ficulties, particularly those who lack
stimulation. It also occurs in some
normal toddlers, often when they are
frustrated or angry; most children grow
out of the behaviour.
head injury Injury to the head may
occur as a result of a blow or a fall. The
severity of the injury depends on
whether the brain is affected. A blow
may shake or bruise the brain (see brain
damage). If the skull is broken (see skull,
fracture of), foreign material or bone
may enter the brain and lead to infec-
tion. A blow or a penetrating injury may
cause swelling of the brain, or tear
blood vessels, which may lead to brain
haemorrhage.
If the head injury is mild, there may
only be a slight headache. In some
cases there is  concussion. More severe
head injuries may result in uncon-
sciousness or coma, which may be fatal.
Amnesia may occur. After a severe brain
injury, there may be some muscular
weakness or  paralysis and loss of sen-
sation. Symptoms such as persistent
vomiting, double vision, or a deteri-
orating level of consciousness could
suggest progressive brain damage.
Investigations may include skull X-rays
and  CT scanning. A blood clot inside
the skull may be life-threatening and
requires surgical removal; severe skull
fractures may also require surgery.
Recovery from concussion may take
several days. There may be permanent
physical or mental disability if the brain
has been damaged. Recovery from a
major head injury can be very slow, 
but there may be signs of progressive
improvement for several years after 
the injury occurred.
head lag The backward flopping of the
head that occurs when an infant is placed
in a sitting position. Head lag is obvi-
ous in a newborn because the neck
muscles are still weak, but by 4 months
the baby can hold his or her head up-
right (see child development). 
Heaf test A type of tuberculin test.
healing The process by which the body
repairs bone, tissue, or organ damage
caused by injury, infection, or disease.
The initial stages of healing are the
same in all parts of the body. After injury,
blood clots form in damaged tissues.
White  blood cells,  enzymes,  histamine,
other chemicals, and proteins from which
HEALING HASHISH
H270
new cells can be made accumulate at
the site of damage. Fibrous tissue is
laid down within the blood clot to form
a supportive structure, and any dead
cells are broken down and absorbed by
the white blood cells. Some tissues,
such as bone and skin, are then able to
regenerate by the proliferation of new
cells around the damaged area. In skin
injuries, the fibrous tissue shrinks as
new skin forms underneath. The tissue
hardens to form a scab, which falls off
when new skin growth is complete. A
scar may remain.
An inadequate blood supply or persis-
tent infection prevents regeneration, and
some tissues, such as nerve tissue, may
be unable to regenerate. In these cases,
the fibrous tissue may develop into tough
scar tissue, which keeps the tissue struc-
ture intact but may impair its function. 
health At its simplest, the absence of
physical and mental disease. A wider
concept promoted by the World Health
Organization is that all people should
have the opportunity to fulfil their
genetic potential. This includes the
ability to develop without the impedi-
ments of poor nutrition, environmental
contamination, or infectious diseases.
(See diet and disease; health hazards.)
health centre A building owned by a
local authority and leased to general
practitioners and other healthcare pro-
fessionals as premises for their work.
health food A term applied to any 
food products thought
to promote health.
health hazards Envir-
onmental factors that
are known to cause, or
are suspected of caus-
ing, disease. The main
types of health hazard
are: infectious disease (see
bacteria;  fungal infec-
tions; insects and disease;
viruses;  zoonosis); an in-
sufficient supply, or the
contamination, of food
and water (see  food
additives; food-borne in-
fection;  food poisoning);
work-related hazards (see
occupational disease and
injury); hazards associated with domes-
tic and social life; tobacco-smoking and
alcohol; and global environmental haz-
ards (see  pollution;  radiation hazards;
sunlight, adverse effects of).
hearing The sense that enables sound
to be perceived. The ear transforms the
sound waves it receives into nerve
impulses that pass to the brain. 
Each ear has 3 distinct regions: the
outer, middle, and inner ear. Sound
waves are channelled through the ear
canal to the middle ear, from where a
complex system of membranes and tiny
bones conveys the vibrations to the
inner ear. The vibrations are converted
into nerve impulses in the  cochlea.
These impulses travel along the auditory
nerve to the medulla of the brain. From
there, they pass via the thalamus to the
superior temporal gyrus, part of the
cerebral cortex involved in perceiving
sound. (See also deafness.)
hearing aids Electronic devices that
improve hearing in people with certain
types of deafness. A hearing aid consists
of a tiny microphone (to pick up sounds),
an amplifier (to increase their volume),
and a speaker (to transmit sounds).
(See also cochlear implant.) 
hearing loss A deterioration in the
ability to perceive sound. (See also
deafness.)
hearing tests Tests carried out to
assess  hearing. Hearing tests are per-
formed as part of a routine assessment
HEALTH HEARING TESTS
H
Chart of
results
AUDIOMETRY
HEARINGTESTS
Response
button
indicating
when sound
heard
Headphones AudiometerDoctorof  child development
and when hearing im-
pairment is suspected.
The tests are some-
times included in a
general medical exam-
ination. Hearing tests
may also be used to
identify the cause of
tinnitus or dizziness.
An audiometer (an
electrical instrument)
is used to test an indi-
vidual＊s ability to hear
sounds at different fre-
quencies and volumes.
The lowest level at
which a person can
hear and repeat words
(the speech reception
threshold) is tested, as
is the ability to hear
words clearly (speech
discrimination). The
type of hearing loss
(see deafness) is deter-
mined by holding a
tuning fork to different parts of the ear. 
heart The muscular pump in the centre
of the chest that beats continuously
and rhythmically to send  blood to the
lungs and the rest of the body. Much of
the heart consists of myocardium, a
special type of muscle. The heart muscle
is supplied with oxygen and nutrients
by 2 coronary arteries. 
The internal surface of the heart is
lined with a smooth membrane, called
endocardium, and the entire heart is
enclosed in a tough, membranous bag,
the  pericardium. Inside the heart there
are 4 chambers. A thick central muscu-
lar wall, the septum, divides the heart
cavity into right and left halves. Each
half consists of an upper chamber,
called an  atrium, and a larger lower
chamber, called a ventricle.
The right atrium receives deoxygen-
ated blood from the entire body via 
2 large veins called the  venae cavae.
This blood is transferred to the right
ventricle and pumped to the lungs via
the pulmonary artery to be oxygenated
and to lose carbon dioxide. The left atri-
um of the heart receives oxygenated
271
blood from the lungs (via the pulm-
onary veins); this blood is transferred to
the left ventricle and then pumped 
to all tissues in the body. One-way
valves at the exits from each chamber
ensure that blood flows in only 1 direc-
tion (see heart valves).
As resistance to blood flow through
the general circulation is much greater
than resistance through the lungs, the
left side of the heart must contract
more forcibly than the right, and has
greater muscular bulk. 
heart, artificial An implantable mech-
anical device that takes over the action
of the heart or assists the heart in main-
taining the circulation. There are 3 main
types of artificial heart.
An intra-aortic balloon pump, com-
prising a balloon in the aorta that
inflates with each heartbeat, increases
the volume of blood entering the circu-
lation. A left ventricular assist device
takes blood from the left ventricle and
pumps it electrically into the abdomi-
nal aorta. There are also mechanical
hearts, which are powered from outside
the body, usually by compressed air.
HEART, ARTIFICIAL HEART
Aorta
LOCATION
HEART
Descending aorta
Septum
Inferior vena cava
Superior
vena cava
Right ventricle
Tricuspid valve
Right atrium
Pulmonary valve
Pulmonary veins
Mitral
valve
Left
ventricle
Pulmonary
artery
Left
atrium
HProblems with artificial hearts include
the formation of blood clots within the
device, and infection. They are therefore
used as a temporary measure until a
heart transplant can be performed. 
heart attack See myocardial infarction.
heartbeat A contraction of the  heart
that pumps blood to the lungs and the
rest of the body. The different parts of
the heart contract in a precise sequence
that is brought about by electrical
impulses that emanate from the  sino-
atrial node at the top of the right atrium.
Three phases make up a cycle of 1
heartbeat: the diastole (resting phase),
the atrial systole (atrial contraction),
and the ventricular systole (ventricular
contraction). The rate at which contrac-
tions occur is called the heart-rate. The
term  pulse refers to the character and
rate of the heartbeat when it is felt at
certain points around the body (at the
wrist, for example). 
heart block A common disorder of the
heartbeat caused by an interruption to
the passage of impulses through the
heart＊s conducting system. 
There are several grades of heart
block, from a slight delay between the
contractions of the atria (see  atrium)
and  ventricles (called a prolonged P-R
interval) to complete heart block, in
which the atria and ventricles beat in-
dependently. Heart block may be due to
coronary artery disease, myocarditis, over-
dose of a digitalis drug, or rheumatic fever.
A prolonged P-R interval causes no
symptoms. In more severe heart block,
the rate of ventricular contraction does
not increase in response to exercise.
This may cause breathlessness as a
result of  heart failure, or chest pains or
fainting dueto  anginapectoris. If the
ventricular beat becomes very slow, or if
it stops altogether for a few seconds,
loss of consciousness and  seizure may
occur due to insufficient blood reaching
the brain. If the delay is prolonged, a
stroke may result.
Symptomless heart block may not
need treatment. Heart block that is
causing symptoms is usually treated by
the fitting of an artificial  pacemaker.
Drugs, such as  isoprenaline, that in-
crease the heart-rate and the strength
272
of the heart＊s contractions, may be
given as a temporary measure.
heartburn A burning pain in the centre
of the chest, which may travel from the
tip of the breastbone to the throat. It
may be caused by eating rich or spicy
food, or by drinking alcohol. Recurrent
heartburn is a symptom of oesophagitis,
which is usually caused by  acid reflux.
Heartburn is often brought on by lying
down or bending forwards. 
heart disease, congenital Any abnor-
mality of the  heart present from birth.
Defects may affect the heart chambers,
valves, or main blood vessels. Majorab-
normalities are septal defects, coarctation
of the aorta,  transposition of the great
vessels, patent ductus arteriosus, tetralogy
of Fallot, hypoplastic left heart syndrome,
pulmonary stenosis, and aortic stenosis. 
Developmental errors leading to de-
fects arise early in the life of the
embryo. In most cases, there is no
known cause.  Rubella  in the mother is
the most common known cause.
The onset and severity of symptoms
depend on the defect. Some anomalies
cause  cyanosis and breathlessness but
others may go undetected. Possible
complications of an untreated heart
defect include impaired growth,  pneu-
monia as a result of mild respiratory
infections, rapid tiring during exercise,
and Eisenmenger complex. 
Antenatal diagnosis, using specialized
ultrasound scanning, is possible for
most defects. After birth, any suspected
defect is investigated using  chest X-
rays, ECG, or echocardiography.
Oxygen and various drug treatments
may improve the symptoms of heart
block. Some conditions, such as small
septal defects or patent ductus arteri-
osus, may get smaller or disappear of
their own accord. Other defects will
require surgical correction. Narrowed
heart valves can often be treated by
balloon  valvuloplasty. In other cases,
open heart surgery or a heart transplant
may be required.
Children with heart defects are at an
increased risk of bacterial  endocarditis;
to prevent this, they are given antibiotic
drugs before all surgical procedures
including dental treatments. 
HEART ATTACKHEART DISEASE, CONGENITAL
H273
heart disease, ischaemic The most
common form of heart disease, in which
narrowing or obstruction of the coronary
arteries, usually by  atherosclerosis,
results in a reduced blood supply (see
coronary artery disease).
heart, disorders of A wide range of
disorders can disrupt the heart＊s action.
In general, genetic factors do not play
a large part in causing heart disorders,
however they do contribute to the
hyperlipidaemias that predispose a per-
son to  atherosclerosis and  coronary
artery disease. Structural abnormalities
in the heart are among the most
common birth defects (see  heart dis-
ease, congenital).
Infections after birth may result in
endocarditis or  myocarditis. Tumours
arising from the heart tissues are rare.
They include noncancerous  myxomas
and cancerous sarcomas. 
The heart muscle may become thin
and flabby from lack of protein and
calories.  Thiamine (vitamin B1) defi-
ciency, common in alcoholics, causes
beriberi with congestive  heart failure.
Alcohol poisoning over many years may
cause a type of cardiomyopathy. Obesity
is an important factor in heart disease,
probably through its effect on other risk
factors, such as  hypertension,  diabetes,
and cholesterol.
The coronary arteries may become
narrowed due to atherosclerosis, depriv-
ing areas of heart muscle of oxygen. The
result may be angina pectoris or, eventu-
ally, a myocardial infarction.
Some drugs, such as the anticancer
drug  doxorubicin,  tricyclic antidepres-
sants, and even drugs used to treat
heart disease, may disturb the heart-
beat or damage the heart muscle.
Many common and serious heart dis-
orders may be a complication of an
underlying condition, such as cardiomy-
opathy or a congenital defect. Such
disorders include cardiac  arrhythmia,
some cases of  heart block, and heart
failure. Cor pulmonale is a failure of the
right side of the heart as a consequence
of lung disease.
heart failure Inability of the  heart to
cope with its workload of pumping
blood to the lungs and to the rest of the
body. Heart failure can primarily affect
the right or the left side of the heart,
although it most commonly affects both
sides, in which case it is known as con-
gestive, or chronic, heart failure.
Left-sided heart failure may be caused
by hypertension, anaemia, hyperthyroid-
ism, a heart valve defect (such as aortic
stenosis,  aortic incompetence, or  mitral
incompetence), or a congenital heart
defect (see  heart disease, congenital).
Other causes of left-sided heart failure
include  coronary artery disease,  myo-
cardial infarction,  cardiac arrhythmias,
and cardiomyopathy.
The left side of the heart fails to empty
completely with each contraction, or
has difficulty in accepting blood that
has been returned from the lungs. The
retained blood creates a back pressure
that causes the lungs to become con-
gested with blood. This condition leads
to pulmonary oedema. 
Right-sided heart failure most often
results from  pulmonary hypertension,
which is itself caused by left-sided fail-
ure or by lung disease (such as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (see pul-
monary disease, chronicobstructive).
Right-sided failure can also be due to a
valve defect, such as tricuspid incompe-
tence, or a congenital heart defect. 
There is back pressure in the circulation
from the heart into the venous system,
causing swollen neck veins, enlargement
of the liver, and  oedema, especially of
the legs and ankles. The intestines may
become congested, causing discomfort.
Immediate treatment consists of bed
rest, with the patient sitting up. Diuretic
drugs are given, and digitalis drugs and
vasodilators, especially  ACE inhibitors,
may also be administered.  Morphine
and oxygen may be given as emergency
treatment in acute left-sided failure. 
heart imaging Techniques that pro-
vide images of heart structure. Imaging
is used to detect disease or abnormalities.
A  chest X-ray, the simplest and most
widely used method of heart imaging,
shows heart size and shape, and the
presence of abnormal  calcification.  Pul-
monary oedema and engorgement of
the vessels connecting the heart and
lungs are also usually detectable. 
HEART IMAGING HEART DISEASE, ISCHAEMIC
HEchocardiography is useful for investi-
gating congenital heart defects and
abnormalities of the valves or heart
wall. An ultrasound technique using the
Doppler effect  allows measurement of
blood flow through valves. Radionuclide
scanning and CT scanning provide infor-
mation about the efficiency of heart
function. Angiography may be used to
show the heart chambers and to assess
the condition of the coronary arteries
and valves. High-quality images of the
heart can be obtained by MRI. 
heart每lung machine A machine that
temporarily takes over the function of
the heart and  lungs to facilitate opera-
tions such as open heart surgery, heart
transplants, and heart每lung transplants.
A heart每lung machine consists of a
pump (to replace the heart＊s function)
and an oxygenator (to replace the lung＊s
function). It bypasses the heart and
lungs, and the heart can be stopped.
Use of a heart每lung machine tends to
damage red blood cells and to cause
blood clotting. These problems can be
minimized, however, by the adminis-
tration of  heparin, an anticoagulant
drug, beforehand.
heart每lung transplant A procedure in
which the  heart and  lungs of a patient
are removed, and replaced with donor
organs. This surgery is used to treat dis-
eases in which the lung damage has
affected the heart, or vice versa. Such
diseases include cystic fibrosis, fibrosing
alveolitis, and some severe congenital
heart defects (see heart disease, congen-
ital). A  heart每lung machine is used to
take over the function of the patient＊s
heart and lungs during the operation,
which is no more dangerous than a
heart transplant. 
heart-rate The rate at which the  heart
contracts to pump blood around the
body. Most people have a heart-rate of
between 60 and 100 beats per minute at
rest. This rate tends to be faster in
childhood and to slow slightly with age.
Very fit people may have a resting rate
below 60 beats per minute.
The heart muscle responds automati-
cally to any increase in the amount of
blood returned to it from active muscles
by increasing its output. During extreme
exercise, heart-rate may increaseto 200
contractions per minute and the output
to almost 250ml per beat. 
HEART每LUNG MACHINE
274
HEART每LUNG MACHINE HEART-RATE
H
Heart每lung
machine
Site of
operation
Intravenous
fluid
Endotracheal
tube delivers
anaesthetic
Anaesthetic
machine
Anaesthetist
Technician
SITE OFTHE
CONNECTIONS
Heart
Aorta
Tube returns blood
to the circulation
Tube returns
blood to the
circulation
Tubes carry
blood to the
machine
Inferior
vena cava
Superior
vena cava
Tubes carry blood from
the heart to the machinesurgery allows the treatment of most
types of heart defect present at birth
(see heart disease, congenital) and vari-
ous disorders of the  heart valves.
Coronary artery bypass is performed to
treat obstruction of the coronary arter-
ies. Narrowing of the coronary arteries
can be treated by  balloon  angioplasty.
Angioplasty balloons have also been
used to open up narrowed heart valves
in cases where the patient is unsuitable
for open heart surgery (see  valvulo-
plasty).  Heart transplant  surgery can
offer hope to people  with progressive,
incurable heart disease.
heart transplant Replacement of a
patient＊s damaged or diseased  heart
with a healthy heart taken from a donor
at the time of death. Typically, trans-
plant patients have advanced  coronary
artery disease or cardiomyopathy. During
the operation, the function of the heart
is taken over by a heart每lung machine.
Most of the diseased heart is removed,
but the back walls of the atria (upper
chambers) are left in place. The ventricles
(upper chambers) are then attached to
the remaining areas of the recipient＊s
heart. Once the immediate post-opera-
tive period is over, the outlook is good.
Patients face the long-term problems
associated with other forms of transplant
surgery. (See also heart每lung transplant.)
The heart-rate is also regulated by the
autonomic nervous system. The parts of
this system concerned with heart action
are a nucleus of nerve cells, called the
cardiac centre, in the  brainstem, and 2
sets of nerves (the parasympathetic and
sympathetic). 
At rest, the parasympathetic nerves 每
particularly the vagus nerve 每 act on the
sinoatrial node to maintain a slow
heart-rate. During or in anticipation of
muscular activity, this inhibition less-
ens and the heart-rate speeds up.
Sympathetic nerves release noradrenaline,
which further increases the heart-rate
and force of contraction. Sympathetic
activity can be triggered by fear or
anger, low blood pressure, or a reduc-
tion of oxygen in the blood. 
Release of  adrenaline and noradren-
aline by the adrenal glands also acts to
increase heart-rate.
The rate and rhythm of the heart can
be measured by feeling the pulse or by
listening with a  stethoscope; a more
accurate record is provided by an ECG.
A resting heart-rate above 100 beats
per minute is termed a tachycardia, and a
rate below 60 beats per minute a brady-
cardia. (See also arrhythmia, cardiac.)
heart sounds The sounds made by the
heart during each  heartbeat. In each
heart cycle, there are 2 main heart
sounds that can clearly be heard
through a stethoscope. The first is like a
※lubb§. It results from closure of the tri-
cuspid and mitral valves at the exits of
the atria, which occurs when the ventri-
cles begin contracting to pump blood
out of the heart. The second sound is a
higher-pitched ※dupp§ caused by clo-
sure of the pulmonary and aortic valves
at the exits of the ventricles when the
ventricles finish contracting. 
Abnormal heart sounds may be a sign
of various disorders. For example,  high-
pitched sounds or ※clicks§ are due to
the abrupt halting of valve opening,
which can occur in people with certain
heart valve defects. Heart murmurs are
abnormal sounds caused by turbulent
blood flow. These may be due to heart
valve defects or congenital heart disease.
heart surgery Any operation that is
performed on the  heart.  Open heart
275
HEART TRANSPLANT HEART SOUNDS
H
Aorta
SITEOF
INCISION
Pulmonary
artery
Back walls of atria
are left in place
HEARTTRANSPLANT
Diseased area
to be replacedbe continued. Some people need long-
term treatment with anticoagulant drugs
to prevent the formationof blood clots
around the new valve.
heat cramps Painful contractions in
muscles that are caused by excessive
salt loss as a result of profuse sweating.
Heat cramps are usually brought on by
strenuous activity in extreme heat. The
condition may occur independently, or
is sometimes a symptom of  heat ex-
haustion or  heatstroke. Prevention and
treatment consist of taking salt tablets
or drinking weak salt solution. 
heat disorders The body functions
most efficiently around 37∼C, and any
major temperature deviation disrupts
body processes. The malfunctioning or
overloading of the body＊s mechanisms
for keeping internal temperature con-
stant may cause a heat disorder.
The mechanisms by which the body
loses unwanted heat are controlled by
the  hypothalamus in the brain. When
blood temperature rises, the hypothal-
amus sends out nerve impulses to
stimulate the  sweat glands and dilate
blood vessels in the skin, which cools the
body down. However, excessive sweat-
ing may result in an imbalance of salts
and fluids in the body, which may lead
to heat cramps or heat exhaustion. When
the hypothalamus is disrupted (for ex-
ample, by a fever), the body may overheat,
leading to  heatstroke. Excessive exter-
nal heat may cause prickly heat.
Most heat disorders can be prevented
by gradual acclimatization to hot condi-
tions and taking salt tablets or solution.
A light diet and frequent cool baths or
showers may also help. Alcohol and
strenuous exercise should be avoided.
heat exhaustion Fatigue, culminating in
collapse, caused by overexposure to heat.
There are 3 main causes of heat exhaus-
tion: insufficient water intake, insufficient
salt intake, and a deficiency in  sweat
production. In addition to fatigue, symp-
toms may include faintness, dizziness,
nausea and vomiting, headache, and,
when salt loss is heavy, heat cramps. The
skin is usually pale and clammy, breath-
ing is fast and shallow, and the pulse is
rapid and weak. Unless it is treated, heat
exhaustion may develop into heatstroke.
276
heart valve A structure at the exit of a
heart chamber that allows blood to flow
out of the chamber, but prevents back-
wash. There are 4 heart valves: aortic,
pulmonary, mitral, and tricuspid. Their
opening and closing during each heart
cycle produces heart sounds.
Any of the 4 heart valves may be
affected by  stenosis (narrowing), which
causes the heart to work harder to force
blood through the valve, or by incompe-
tence or insufficiency (leakiness), which
makes the valve unable to prevent back-
wash of blood. These defects cause
characteristic heart murmurs.
Heart-valve defects may be present at
birth (see  heart disease, congenital), or
they may be acquired later in life. The
most common congenital valve defects
are aortic stenosis and pulmonary stenosis.
Acquired heart-valve disease is usually
the result of degenerative changes or
ischaemia affecting part of the heart and
leading to aortic stenosis or mitral in-
competence. Rheumatic fever can cause
mitral stenosis, mitral incompetence,
aortic valve defects,  tricuspid stenosis
and  tricuspid incompetence. The heart
valves may also be damaged by bacteri-
al endocarditis.
Heart-valve disorders commonly lead
to  heart failure,  arrhythmias, or symp-
toms resulting from reduced blood
supply to body tissues.
Heart-valve defects may be diagnosed
by  auscultation,  chest X-ray,  ECG, or
echocardiography and may be corrected
by heart-valve surgery. 
heart-valve surgery An operation to
correct a heart valve defect or to remove
a diseased or damaged valve. A heart
valve may have to be repaired, widened,
or replaced because it is either incom-
petent (leaky) or stenotic  (narrowed).
Widening of a valve may involve  valv-
otomy or valvuloplasty. A damaged valve
can be replaced by a mechanical one
(fashioned from metal and plastic), a
valve constructed from human tissue, 
a pig valve, or a valve taken from a
human donor after death. A  heart每lung
machine is used during replacement.
After heart-valve surgery, symptoms
such as breathlessness may take weeks
to improve and require medication to
HEART VALVE HEAT EXHAUSTION
HHeimlich manoeuvre A first-aid treat-
ment for  choking. The sole aim of the
Heimlich manoeuvre is to dislodge the
material that is causing the blockage by
placing one fist, covered by the other,
just below the victim＊s rib cage, and
pulling sharply inwards and upwards to
give an abdominal thrust. 
Helicobacter pylori A  bacterium now
known to be the cause of most  peptic
ulcers as well as a factor in stomach can-
cer. The bacterium is thought to damage
the mucus layer of the  stomach and
duodenum, allowing gastric acid to cause
ulceration. Treatment with antibiotics to
eradicate the infection has provedsuc-
cessful in achieving long-term recovery
from peptic ulcers.
heliotherapy A form of  phototherapy
involving exposure to sunlight.
helminth infestation Infection by any
parasitic worm. (See worm infestation.) 
hemianopia Loss of half of the  visual
field in each eye. Hemianopia may be
※homonymous§ (in which the same side
of both eyes is affected) or ※heterony-
mous§ (in which the loss is in opposite
sides of the eyes). Visual loss may be
temporary or permanent. 
Hemianopia is not due to a disorder
of the eyes themselves but results from
damage to the  optic nerves or brain.
Transient homonymous hemianopia in
HEIMLICHMANOEUVRE
277
Treatment of heat exhaustion involves
rest and the replenishment of lost water
and salt. Prevention is usually by grad-
ual acclimatization to hot conditions.
heatstroke A life-threatening condition
in which overexposure to heat coupled
with a breakdown of the body＊s heat-
regulating mechanisms cause the body
to become dangerously overheated. 
Heatstroke is most commonly caused
by prolonged, unaccustomed exposure
to the sun in a hot climate. Strenuous
activity, unsuitable clothing, overeating,
and drinking too much alcohol are
sometimes contributory factors.
Heatstroke is often preceded by  heat
exhaustion, which consists of fatigue
and profuse sweating. With the onset of
heatstroke, the sweating diminishes
and may stop entirely. The skin be-
comes hot and dry, breathing is shallow,
and the pulse is rapid and weak. Body
temperature rises dramatically and, with-
out treatment, the victim may lose
consciousness and even die.
Heatstroke can be prevented by grad-
ual acclimatization to hot conditions
(see heat disorders). If heatstroke deve-
lops, emergency treatment is required.
This consists of cooling the victim by
wrapping him or her in a cold, wet
sheet, fanning, sponging with water,
and giving salt solution.
heat treatment The use of heat to treat
disease, aid recovery from injury, or to
relieve pain. Heat treatment is useful
for certain conditions, such as ligament
sprains, as it stimulates blood flow and
promotes healing of tissues. 
Moist heat may be administered by
soaking the affected area in a warm
bath, or applying a hot  compress or
poultice. Dry heat may be administered
by a heating pad, hot-water bottle, or by
a heat lamp that produces  infra-red
rays. More precise methods of adminis-
tering heat to tissues deeper in the
body include  ultrasound treatment and
short-wave diathermy.
heel The part of the foot below the ankle
and behind the arch. The heel consists
of the calcaneus (heel bone), an under-
lying pad of fat that acts as a cushion,
and a layer of skin, which is usually
thickened due to pressure from walking. 
HEMIANOPIA HEATSTROKE
H
Hands placed under
ribcage pull sharply
inwards and upwards278
young people is usually caused by
migraine. In older people, it occurs in
transient ischaemic attacks. Permanent
homonymous hemianopia is usually
caused by a  stroke, but it may result
from brain damage by a tumour, injury,
or infection. Hemianopia may also be
caused by pressure on the optic nerve
from a pituitary tumour. 
hemiballismus Irregular and uncon-
trollable flinging movements of the arm
and leg on 1 side of the body, caused by
disease of the  basal ganglia. (See also
athetosis; chorea.)
hemicolectomy The surgical removal
of half, or a major portion, of the colon.
(See also colectomy.) 
hemiparesis Muscular weakness or par-
tial paralysis affecting only 1 side of the
body (see hemiplegia).
hemiplegia Paralysis or weakness on 1
side of the body, caused by damage or
disease affecting the motor nerve tracts
in the opposite side of the brain. A com-
moncause is a  stroke. Others include
head injury, brain tumour, brain haemor-
rhage,  encephalitis,  multiple sclerosis,
complications of  meningitis, or a  con-
version disorder. Treatment is for the
underlying cause, and is carried out in
conjunction with physiotherapy.
Henoch每Sch?nlein purpura Inflam-
mation of small blood vessels, causing
leakage of blood into the skin, joints,
kidneys, and intestine. The disease is
most common in young children, and
may occur after an infection such as a
sore throat. The condition may also be
due to an abnormal allergic reaction. 
The main symptom is a raised purplish
rash on the buttocks and backs of the
limbs. The joints are swollen and often
painful, and colicky abdominal pain may
occur. In some cases, there is intestinal
bleeding, leading to blood in the faeces.
The kidneys may become inflamed, resul-
ting in blood and protein in the urine.
The only treatment usually required is
bed rest and analgesic drugs. Complica-
tions may arise if kidney inflammation
persists. In severe cases,  corticosteroid
drugs may be given.
heparin An  anticoagulant drug used to
prevent and treat abnormal  blood clot-
ting. Heparin is given by injection and is
used as an immediate treatment for
deep veinthrombosis  or for  pulmonary
embolism. Newly developed ※low molec-
ular weight heparins§, for example
tinzaparin, which need to be injected
once a day, are now widely used and
can be self-administered at home. 
Adverse effects of heparin include rash,
aching bones, and abnormal bleeding
in different parts of the body. Long-term
use may cause osteoporosis.
hepatectomy, partial Surgical removal
of part of the liver. Surgery may be need-
edto remove a damaged area of liver
following injury, or to treat noncancer-
ous liver tumours and  hydatid disease.
Rarely, liver cancer is treated in this way.
hepatectomy, total Surgical removal of
the  liver. Hepatectomy is the 1st stage
in a liver transplant operation.
hepatic Relating to the liver.
hepatitis Inflammation of the liver, with
accompanying damage to liver cells. The
condition may be acute (see  hepatitis,
acute) or chronic (see hepatitis, chronic)
and have various causes. (See also hep-
atitis A; hepatitis B; hepatitis C; hepatitis
D; hepatitis E; hepatitis, viral.)
hepatitis A  Also known as epidemic
hepatitis, this disorder is caused by the
hepatitis A virus, which is transmitted
to people in contaminated food or drink.
The incubation period lasts for 15每40
days, after which nausea, fever and jaun-
dice develop. Recovery usually occurs
within 3 weeks. Serious complications
are rare. Active  immunization provides
the best protection against hepatitis A,
and an attack can confer immunity.
hepatitis, acute  Short-term inflamma-
tion of the  liver, which usually recovers
in 1每2 months. In some cases, acute
hepatitis may progress to chronic hep-
atitis (see  hepatitis, chronic), but it
rarely leads to acute liver failure. 
Acute hepatitis is fairly common. The
most frequent cause is infection with one
of the hepatitis viruses (see  hepatitis,
viral), but it can arise as a result of other
infections such as cytomegalovirus infec-
tion or Legionnaires＊ disease. It may also
occur as a result of overdose of halothane
or  paracetamol or exposure to toxic
chemicals including alcohol (see  liver
disease, alcoholic). Symptoms range from
HEMIBALLISMUS HEPATITIS, ACUTE
H279
few and mild to severe with pain, fever,
and  jaundice. Blood tests, including  liver
function tests, may be used for diagnosis.
In most cases of acute viral hepatitis,
natural recovery occurs within a few
weeks. If the disorder is caused by expo-
sure to a chemical or drug, detoxification
using an  antidote may be possible.  In-
tensive care may be required if the liver
is badly damaged. Rarely, a  liver trans-
plant is the only way of saving life. In all
cases, alcohol should be avoided.
hepatitis B Formerly known as serum
hepatitis, this disorder is due to the hep-
atitis B virus, which is transmitted in
infected blood, blood products, or other
body fluids, often through contact with
needles, blood transfusions, or sexual
contact. After an incubation period of 1每6
months, the onset of symptoms, such as
headache, fever, and jaundice, is sudden.
Most patients recover, but hepatitisB
can be fatal. A vaccine is available.
In about 5percent of cases, the virus
continues to cause inflammation and can
still be detected in the blood 6 months
after infection. People who suffer from
persistent infection are at long-term risk
of liver cancer and cirrhosis and may be
treated with interferon.
hepatitis C  Caused by the hepatitis C
virus and formerly known as non-A non-B
hepatitis, this infection is often trans-
mitted through sharing needles. Blood
transfusions no longer pose a signifi-
cant risk because of blood screening.
Hepatitis C has an incubation period
of 6每12 months and begins as a mild
illness which may go undetected. In
about 3 in 4 patients, chronic hepatitis
develops (see  hepatitis, chronic), which
can progress to cirrhosis of the liver and
an increased risk of hepatoma. 
hepatitis, chronic Inflammation of the
liver persisting for a prolonged period.
Eventually, scar tissue forms and liver
cirrhosis may develop.
Chronic hepatitis may develop follow-
ing an  attack of acute hepatitis (see
hepatitis, acute). It may also occur as the
result of an autoimmune disorder, a viral
infection(see hepatitis, viral), a reaction
to certain types of drugs or, more rarely,
to a metabolic disorder, such as haemo-
chromatosis or Wilson＊s disease.
Chronic hepatitis may cause slight
tiredness or no symptoms at all. It is
diagnosed by liver biopsy. Autoimmune
hepatitis is treated with  corticosteroid
drugs and  immunosuppressants. Viral
infections often respond to  interferon.
In the drug-induced type, withdrawal of
the medication can lead to recovery. For
metabolic disturbances, treatment de-
pends on the underlying disorder. 
hepatitis D  An infection of the liver
caused by the hepatitis D virus, which
occurs only in people who already have
hepatitis B infection. People who develop
hepatitis D will usually suffer from
severe chronic liver disease.
hepatitis E  A type of  hepatitis, caused
by the hepatitis E virus, transmitted in
contaminated food or drink. The dis-
ease is similar to hepatitis A.
hepatitis, viral Any type of  hepatitis
caused by a viral infection. Five viruses
that attack the liver as their primary tar-
get have been identified. They cause
hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, hep-
atitis D, and hepatitis E.
hepatoma A type of liver cancer.
hepatomegaly Enlargement of the liver,
occurring as a result of any liver disor-
der (see liver, disorders of).
herbal medicine Systems of medical
treatment in which various parts of
different plants are used to promote
health and to treat symptoms.
hereditary spherocytosis See  sphe-
rocytosis, hereditary.
heredity The transmission of traits and
disorders through genetic mechanisms.
Each individual inherits a combination of
genes via the sperm and egg cells from
which he or she is derived. The interac-
tion of the genes determines inherited
characteristics, including, in some cases,
disorders or susceptibility to disorders.
(See also genetic disorders; inheritance.)
heritability A measure of the extent to
which a disease or disorder is the result
of inherited factors, as opposed to envi-
ronmental influences such as diet and
climate. Certain disorders (such as hae-
mophilia or cystic fibrosis) are known to
be caused entirely by hereditary factors.
Others are caused by environmental
factors. Between these extremes are
many disorders (such as schizophrenia)
HERITABILITY HEPATITIS B
H280
in which both inheritance and environ-
ment probably play a part. 
A rough estimate of heritability can be
obtained from the known incidence of a
disorder in the first-degree relatives of
affected people compared with the inci-
dence of the disorder in a population
exposed to similar environmental influ-
ences. Estimates of heritability are
useful in  genetic counselling. (See also
genetic disorders.)
hermaphroditism A  congenital disor-
der in which  gonads of both sexes are
present, and the external genitalia are
not clearly male or female. True herm-
aphroditism is extremely rare and its
cause unknown. A more common con-
dition is  pseudohermaphroditism, in
which the gonads of only 1 sex are 
present, but the ex-
ternal genitalia are
not clearly either
male or female. 
hernia The protru-
sion of an organ or
tissue through a weak
area in the muscle
or other tissue that
normally contains it.
The term is usually
applied to a protru-
sion of the intestine
through the abdom-
inal wall. In a hiatus
hernia, the stomach
protrudes through the
diaphragm and into
the chest.
Abdominal hernias
are usually due to a
congenital weakness
in the wall of the ab-
domen. The hernias
may result from dam-
age caused by lifting
heavy objects, per-
sistent coughing, or
straining to defae-
cate, or may develop
after an operation.
There are several types of hernia, and
they are classified according to their lo-
cation in the body. The most important
are inguinal hernias, which mainly affect
men; femoral hernias, which are more
common in overweight women; and
umbilical hernias, which occur in babies.
The 1st symptom of an abdominal
hernia is usually a bulge in the abdomi-
nal wall. There may also be abdominal
discomfort. Sometimes the protruding
intestine can be pushed back into place.
Severe pain occurs when the hernia
bulges out and cannot be put back;
surgery (see hernia repair) is usually nec-
essary. If the blood supply to a twisted,
trapped portion of intestine becomes
impaired (a strangulated hernia),  gan-
grene of the bowel may develop. A
strangulated hernia requires urgent
treatment. Umbilical hernias in babies
can usually be left untreated as they
tend to disappear naturally by age 5.
hernia repair Surgical correction of a
hernia. Surgery is usually performed to
treat a hernia of the abdominal wall that
is painful or cannot be pushed back into
place. A strangulated hernia requiresan
emergency operation. During surgery, the
protruding intestine is pushed back into
the abdomen and the weakened muscle
wall is strengthened. Either openor
minimally invasive surgery may be used.
herniated disc See disc prolapse.
herniorrhaphy Surgical correction of a
hernia. (See hernia repair.)
heroin A  narcotic drug similar to mor-
phine. When used for medical purposes,
it is generally known as  diamorphine.
Heroin is a white or brownish powder
that can be smoked, sniffed, or dis-
solved in water and injected. 
As well as having an analgesic effect,
heroin produces sensations of warmth,
calmness, drowsiness, and a loss of
concern for outside events. Long-term
use of the drug causes  tolerance and
psychological and physical dependence
(see  drug dependence; heroin abuse).
Sudden withdrawal produces shivering,
abdominal cramps, diarrhoea, vomiting,
and restlessness. 
heroin abuse Nonmedical use of hero-
in. Heroin addiction has many adverse
effects on the user, including injection
scars, skin abscesses, weight loss,
impotence, and the risk of infection
with  hepatitis B,  hepatitis C, and  HIV
through sharing needles. Death com-
monly occurs from accidental overdose.
HERMAPHRODITISM HEROIN ABUSE
H
FEMORALHERNIA
HERNIA
INGUINALHERNIA
UMBILICALHERNIA281
herpangina A throat infection caused
by coxsackievirus. Herpangina most com-
monly affects young children. The virus is
usually transmitted via infected droplets
coughed or sneezed into the air. Many
people harbour the virus but do not
have symptoms. Symptoms may include
fever, sore throat, headache, abdominal
discomfort, and muscular pains. The
throat becomes red and a few small
blisters appear, which enlarge and burst.
Symptoms usually clear up within a
week, without specific treatment 
herpes Any of a variety of conditions
characterized by an eruption of small, 
usually painful, blisters on the skin. The
term usually refers to an infection with
the herpes simplex  virus. Forms of this
virus are responsible for cold sores and
genital herpes (see  herpes, genital),
among other conditions.
A closely related virus, varicella每zoster,
is responsible for 2 other conditions in
which skin blisters are a feature: chick-
enpox and herpes zoster (shingles).
herpes, genital A  sexually transmitted
infection caused by 1 form of the herpes
simplex virus, known as HSV2. After an
incubation period of about a week, the
virus produces soreness, burning, itch-
ing, and small blisters in the genital area.
The blisters burst to leave small, painful
ulcers, which heal in 10每21 days. The
lymph nodes in the groin may become
enlarged and painful, and the person
may develop headache and fever.
Genital herpes cannot be cured, but
treatment can reduce the severity of
symptoms. Antiviral drugs such as  aci-
clovir make the ulcers less painful and
also encourage healing. Other meas-
ures include taking analgesic drugs and
bathing with a salt solution.
Once the virus enters the body, it stays
there for the rest of the person＊s life. Re-
current attacks may occur, usually during
periods when the person  is feeling run
down, anxious, or depressed, before men-
struation, or after sexual intercourse. The
virus can be spread to others through sex-
ual intercourse even when symptomsare
absent. Recurrent attacks tend to become
less frequent and less severe over time.
Genital herpes may be passed from a
pregnant woman to her baby during
delivery. If the virus can be detected in
vaginal swabs, delivery by  caesarean
section is usually recommended.
herpes gestationis A rare skin disor-
der of pregnant women that produces
crops of blisters on the legs and
abdomen. The cause is not known.
Severe herpes gestationis is treated
with  corticosteroid drugs in tablet form
and may require hospital admission.
The disorder usually clears up com-
pletely after birth of the baby, but tends
to recur in subsequent pregnancies.
herpes simplex A common viral infec-
tion, characterized by small, fluid-filled
blisters. Herpes simplex infections are
contagious and usually spread by direct
contact. The virus has 2 forms, HSV1
(herpes simplex virus, type 1) and
HSV2 (herpes simplex virus, type 2).
Most people are infected with HSV1 at
some point in their lives, usually during
childhood. The initial infection may be
symptomless, or may cause a flu-like ill-
ness with mouth ulcers. Thereafter, the
virus remains dormant in nerve cells in
the facial area. In many people, the
virus is periodically reactivated, causing
cold sores. Rarely, the virus infects the
fingers, causing a painful eruption called
a herpetic whitlow. HSV1 may produce
eczema herpeticum (an extensive rash
of skin blisters) in a person with a pre-
existing skin disorder, such as  eczema.
Eczema herpeticum may require hospi-
tal admission. If the virus gets into an
eye, it may cause conjunctivitis or a cor-
neal ulcer. Rarely, HSV1 spreads to the
brain, leading to encephalitis. The virus
may cause a potentially fatal generalized
infection in a person with an  immuno-
deficiency disorder or in someone taking
immunosuppressant drugs. HSV2 is the
usual cause of sexually transmitted gen-
ital herpes (see herpes, genital).
Treatment of herpes simplex depends
on its type, site, and severity. Antiviral
drugs, such as aciclovir, may be helpful,
particularly if used early in an infection.
herpes zoster An infection of the nerves
supplying certain skin areas that is char-
acterized by a painful rash. Also called
shingles, herpes zoster is especially com-
mon among older people. It often affects
1 side of the body only. Sometimes the
HERPES ZOSTER HERPANGINA
Hinfection involves the face and eye and
is called herpes zoster ophthalmicus.
Herpes zoster is caused by the  vari-
cella每zoster virus, which also causes
chickenpox. After an attack of chicken-
pox, some of the viruses survive and lie
dormant for many years. In some peo-
ple, a decline in the efficiency of the
immune system, especially in old age or
because of disease, allows the viruses
to re-emerge and cause herpes zoster.
Herpes zoster is also common in people
whose immune system is weakened by
stress or by certain drugs,such as corti-
costeroid drugs or anticancer drugs.
The first indication of herpes zoster is
excessive sensitivity in the skin, fol-
lowed by pain. After about 5 days, the
rash appears as small, raised, red spots
that soon turn into blisters. These dry
and develop crusts that drop off, some-
times leaving small pitted scars. 
The most serious feature of herpes
zoster is pain after the attack (posther-
petic pain), caused by nerve damage,
which may last for months or years.
Herpes zoster ophthalmicus may cause
a corneal ulcer or uveitis. 
If treatment is begun soon after the
rash appears,  antiviral drugs,  such as
aciclovir, will reduce the severity of the
symptoms and minimize nerve damage.
Analgesic drugs may also be helpful. 
heterosexuality Sexual attraction to
members of the opposite sex. (See also
bisexuality; homosexuality.)
heterozygote A term used to describe
a person whose cells contain 2 different
alleles controlling a specified inherited
trait. A homozygote has identical alleles
controlling that trait. (See also  inheri-
tance; genetic disorders.)
hexachlorophane An antibacterial drug
used in dusting powder form to prevent
staphylococcal infections in newborns,
and to prevent and treat pressure sores.
hiatus hernia A condition in which part
of the  stomach protrudes upwards into
the chest through the opening in the dia-
phragm that is normally occupied by the
oesophagus. The cause is unknown but
it is more common in obese people and
those with a long-term cough, such as
smokers. In some cases, it is present at
birth. Many people have no symptoms.
282
In some people, there is acid reflux. This
may lead to oesophagitis or heartburn.
Antacid drugs or H2 blockers may be
given to reduce stomach acidity. In
severe cases, surgery may be required. 
Hib vaccine A vaccine administered rou-
tinely at 2, 3, and 4 months of age to
provide immunity to the bacterium HAEM-
OPHILUS INFLUENZA type b (Hib). Before
the vaccine was generally available, Hib
infection was a common cause of bacter-
ial meningitis and epiglottitis in children.
hiccup A sudden, involuntary contraction
of the diaphragm followed by rapid clo-
sure of the vocal cords. Most attacks of
hiccups last only a few minutes, and are
not medically significant. Rarely, they may
be due to a condition, such as pneumonia
or pancreatitis, that causes irritation of the
diaphragm or phrenic nerves. Chlorpro-
mazine, haloperidol, or diazepam may be
prescribed for frequent, prolonged attacks.
Hickman catheter  A flexible plastic
tube, also known as a skin-tunnelled
catheter, that is passed through the chest
and inserted into the subclavian vein,
which leads to the heart. It is often used
in people who have  leukaemia or other
cancers and need regular chemotherapy
and blood tests. The catheter allows
drugs to be injected directly into the
bloodstream and blood samples to be
obtained easily. The catheter is inserted,
under local anaesthesia. It can remain in
position for months; the external end is
plugged when not in use.
hidradenitis suppurativa Inflammation
of the  sweat glands in the armpits and
groin due to a bacterial infection. Ab-
scesses develop beneath the skin, which
becomes reddened and painful and may
ooze pus. The condition tends to be re-
current and can eventually cause scarring
in the affected areas. Antibiotic drugs may
help to reduce the severity of an outbreak.
high density lipoprotein One of a
group of proteins that transport lipids in
the blood. High levels of high density
lipoprotein can help protect against
atherosclerosis. (See also  fats and oils;
low density lipoprotein.)
hip The joint between the pelvis and the
upper end of the  femur. The hip is a
ball-and-socket joint; the smooth, roun-
ded head of the femur fits securely into
HETEROSEXUALITY HIP
Hthe acetabulum, a cup-like cavity in the
pelvis. Tough ligaments attach the femur
to the pelvis, further stabilizing the
joint and providing it with the necessary
strength to support the weight of the
body and take the strain of leg move-
ments. The structure of the hip allows a
considerable range of leg movement.
hip, clicking A fairly common condition
in adults in which a characteristic click-
ing is heard and felt during certain
movements of the hip joint. Clicking hip
is caused by a tendon slipping over the
bony prominence on the outside of the
femur, and does not indicate disease.
Clicking of the hip that can be heard
during examination of newborn babies
indicates possible dislocation of the hip
(see developmenal hip displasia).
hip, congenital dislocation of See
developmental hip dysplasia.
hip dysplasia, developmental See
developmental hip dysplasia.
hippocampus A structure in the  limbic
system of the brain. The hippocampus,
consisting of a band of  grey matter, is
involved with some learning processes
and long-term memory storage.
Hippocratic oath A set of ethical prin-
ciples derived from the writings of the
Greek physician Hippocrates that is
concerned with a doctor＊s duty to work
for the good of the patient.
hip replacement A surgical procedure
to replace all or part of a diseased hip
joint with an artificial substitute. The
HIPREPLACEMENT
replacement is most often carried out in
older people whose joints are stiff and
painful as a result of osteoarthritis. It may
also be needed if  rheumatoid arthritis
has spread to the hip joint or if the top
end of the femur is badly fractured (see
femur, fracture of).
Hirschsprung＊s disease A  congenital
disorder in which the  rectum, and
sometimes the lower part of the  colon,
lack the ganglion cells that control the
intestine＊s rhythmic contractions. The
affected area becomes narrowed and
blocks the movement of faecal material. 
The disease is rare and tends to run in
families. It occurs about 4 times more
often in boys. Symptoms, which include
constipation and bloating, usually de-
velop in the first few weeks of life, but
may become evident in infancy or early
childhood. The child usually has a poor
appetite and may fail to grow properly. 
A barium X-ray examination can show
the narrowed segment of the intestine.
A  biopsy may be taken. Treatment of
Hirschsprung＊s disease involves remov-
ing the narrowed segment and rejoining
the normal intestine to the anus.
hirsutism Excessive hairiness, particular-
ly in women. The additional hair is coarse
and grows in a male pattern on the face,
trunk, and limbs. Hirsutism is a symptom
of certain conditions, such as polycystic
ovary syndrome (see  ovary, polycystic)
andcongenital  adrenal hyperplasia, in
which the level of male hormones in the
blood is abnormally high. Hirsutism
can also be a result of taking anabolic
steroids (see  steroids, anabolic). More
commonly,however, hirsutism is not a
sign of any disorder; it occurs in many
normal women, especially after the
menopause. (See also hypertrichosis.)
histamine A chemical that is present in
cells (mainly mast cells) throughout the
body that is released during an allergic
reaction (see  allergy). Histamine acti-
vates 2 main types of receptors, H1 and
H2. H1 activation is responsible for the
swelling and redness that occur in
inflammation. It also narrows the air-
ways in the lungs and causes itching. H2
activation stimulates acid production
by the stomach. These effects can be
counteracted by antihistamine drugs.
283
HISTAMINE HIP, CLICKING
H
Pelvis
Head of femur
(thighbone)
removed
Skin
incision
Shaft of
femur
Area of
pelvis
hollowed
out
ARTIFICIAL 
HIPJOINT
Pelvic socket
Femoral 
componenthistory-taking The process by which a
doctor learns from patients the symp-
toms of their illnesses and any previous
disorders. (See also diagnosis.)
HIV The abbreviation for human immuno-
deficiency virus. HIV is a retrovirus (see
virus) and is the cause of AIDS. There
are 2 closely related viruses: HIV-1, which
is the most common cause of AIDS
throughout the world; and HIV-2, which
is largely confined to West Africa.
HIV gains access to the body through
contaminated blood transfusions, non-
sterile needles, or sexual intercourse. A
fetus may be infected via the  placenta.
HIV has an affinity for the T-lymphocytes,
in which the virus multiplies and, in
some cases, destroys function. People
with HIV infection should have regular
monitoring in order to determine when
specific treatments, such as antiretroviral
drugs, are necessary.
hives An alternative name for urticaria.
HLA The abbreviation for  human leuko-
cyte antigen.
HLA types See histocompatibility antigens.
hoarseness A rough, husky, or croaking
voice. Short-lived hoarseness is often
due to overuse of the voice, which
strains the muscles in the  larynx. It is
also commonly caused by inflammation
of the vocal cords in acute  laryngitis.
Persistent hoarseness may be due to
chronic irritation of the larynx, which can
be caused by smoking, excessive con-
sumption of alcohol, chronic bronchitis,
284
histamine2-receptor antagonists See
H2-receptor antagonists.
histiocytosisX A rare childhood dis-
ease in which there is an overgrowth of
a type of tissue cell called a histiocyte.
The cause is unknown, but histiocytosis X
probably results from a disturbance of
the immune system. In the mildest form,
rapid cell growth occurs in 1 bone only,
usually the skull, a  clavicle, a rib, or a
vertebra, causing swelling and pain. In
the most severe, and least common,
form, there is a rash and enlargement of
the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes. 
histocompatibility antigens A group
of proteins that have a role in the
immune system. Certain types of  histo-
compatibility  antigens are essential for
the immunological function of killer T
cells (see lymphocytes). The antigens act
as a guide for killer T cells to recognize
and kill abnormal or foreign cells. 
The main group of histocompatibility
antigens is the human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) system, which consists of several
series of antigens. A person＊s tissue type
(the particular set of HLAs in the body
tissues) is unique, except for identical
twins, who have the same set.
HLA analysis has some useful appli-
cations. Comparison of HLA types may
show that 2 people are related, and it has
been used in paternity testing. The HLA
system is also used in  tissue-typing to
help match recipient and donor tissues
before  transplant surgery. Certain HLA
types occur more frequently in people
with particular diseases, such as multiple
sclerosis, coeliac disease, and ankylosing
spondylitis. HLA testing can help to con-
firm the presence of such diseases and
identify people at risk of developing them.
histology The study of tissues, includ-
ing their cellular structure and function.
The main application of histology in
medicine is in the diagnosis of disease. 
histopathology A branch of  histology
concerned with the effects of disease on
the microscopic structure of tissues.
histoplasmosis An infection caused by
inhaling the spores of the fungus HISTO-
PLASMA CAPSULATUM, which is found in
soil contaminated with bird or bat
droppings. It occurs in parts of the
Americas, the Far East, and Africa. 
HOARSENESS
H
HIV
Cross-sectioned
virus
Genetic
material
Outer shell
of virus
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUSES
HISTAMINE2-RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTScontinuously for 24 hours or longer. The
monitor records by means of electrodes
attachedto  the chest and allows the
detection of intermittent arrhythmias.
homeopathy A system of complementary
medicine. Homeopathy involves admin-
istering minute doses of medicines
which, in a healthy person, would be
capable of inducing symptoms of the
condition that is being treated.
homeostasis The automatic processes
by which the body maintains a constant
internal environment despite external
changes. Homeostasis regulates condi-
tions such as temperature and acidity by
negative feedback. For example, when the
body overheats,  sweating is stimulated
until the temperature returns to normal.
Homeostasis also involves the regulation
of blood pressure and blood glucose levels.
homocystinuria A rare, inherited con-
dition caused by an enzyme deficiency.
Homocystinuria is a type of inborn error
of metabolism (see metabolism, inborn
errors of) in which there is an abnormal
presence of homocystine (an  amino
acid) in the blood and urine. Affected
people are very tall, with long limbs and
fingers. Some have skeletal deformities
and abnormalities of the eye  lens. The
condition is incurable but may be
improved by a special diet.
homosexuality Sexual attraction to peo-
ple of the same sex. (See also bisexuality;
heterosexuality.)
homozygote A term used to describe a
person whose cells contain 2 identical
alleles controlling a specified inherited
trait. The cells of a heterozygote contain
HOLTERMONITOR
285
or constant dripping of mucus from the
nasal passages. Polyps on the vocal cords
may also cause hoarseness. In people
with  hypothyroidism, hoarseness can
result from formation of tissue on the
vocal cords. In young children, hoarse-
ness may be a symptom of  croup.
Occasionally persistent hoarseness in
adults has a more serious cause, such
as cancer of the larynx (see larynx, can-
cer of), thyroid cancer, or lung cancer. 
Resting the voice helps in strain- or
laryngitis- related cases. If hoarseness
persists for more than 2 weeks, a doctor
should be consulted. A  laryngoscopy
may be performed to exclude a serious
underlying cause . 
Hodgkin＊s disease An uncommon, can-
cerousdisorder in which there is a
proliferation of cells in the lymphoid
tissue (found mainly in the lymph nodes
and spleen). Men are affected more than
women. The cause is unknown. 
The most common sign is the painless
enlargement of lymph nodes, typically
in the neck or armpits. There may be a
general feeling of illness, with fever,
weight loss, and night sweats. There
may also be generalized itching. As the
disease progresses, the  immune system
becomes increasingly impaired and life-
threatening complications may result
from normally trivial infections.
Diagnosis of Hodgkin＊s disease depends
on the identification of characteristic cells
in a biopsy of affected tissue. The extent
of the disease (its stage) can be assessed
by  chest X-ray,  CT scanning or MRI of
the abdomen, a bone marrow biopsy and
a liver biopsy. If the disease is localized
to a small area,  radiotherapy is usually
curative. If the disease has spread to
involve many organs, long-term treat-
ment with  anticancer drugs is needed.
(See also lymphoma, non-Hodgkin＊s.)
hole in the heart The common name
for a septal defect.
holistic medicine A form of therapy
that treats the whole person, not just
specific disease symptoms. A holistic
approach is emphasized by many prac-
titioners of complementary medicine.
Holter monitor A wearable device used
in ambulatory electrocardiography (ECG)
to record the heart＊s electrical activity
HOMOZYGOTE HODGKIN＊S DISEASE
Shoulder
strap
Electrode
Holter
monitor
H286
2 different alleles controlling that trait.
(See also inheritance; genetic disorders.)
hookworm infestation An infestation
of the small intestine by small, round,
blood-sucking worms of the  NECATOR
AMERICANUS or ANCYLOSTOMA DUODENALE
species. Hookworm infestation occurs
mainly in the tropics. 
The larvae penetrate the skin of the
feet or are ingested. They migrate
throughout the body and mature in the
small intestine. Adult worms lay eggs,
which pass out in the faeces. 
When larvae penetrate the skin, a red,
itchy rash may develop on the feet. In
light infestations, there may be no fur-
ther symptoms. In heavier infestations,
migration of the larvae through the lungs
may produce cough and  pneumonia;
adult worms in the intestines may
cause abdominal discomfort. The most
important problem is iron-deficiency
anaemia due to loss of blood.
Diagnosis is made by microscopic ex-
amination of the faeces for worm eggs.
Anthelmintic drugs kill the worms. (See
also larva migrans.)
hordeolum The medical name for a stye.
hormonal disorders Conditions caused
by malfunction of an endocrinegland.
hormone A chemical released into the
bloodstream by a gland or tissue that
has a specific effect on tissues else-
where in the body. 
Many hormones are produced by endo-
crine glands. Hormones are also secreted
by other organs, including the brain,
kidneys, intestines, and, in pregnant
women, the placenta. They control many
body functions, including metabolism of
cells, growth, sexual development, and
the body＊s response to stress or illness. 
hormone antagonist A drug that blocks
the action of a hormone. 
hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
The use of a synthetic or natural  hor-
mone to treat a hormone deficiency.
Most commonly, HRT refers to the use
of female hormones to relieve symptoms
associated with the menopause, such as
hot flushes and vaginal dryness. HRT
also reduces the risk of the long-term
effects associated with low  oestrogen
levels, such as osteoporosis. An oestro-
gen is usually taken in combination
with a progestogen. The hormones may
be taken orally or released into the
bloodstream from a hormonal implant,
skin patch, or gel.
Minor adverse effects of HRT include
nausea, breast tenderness, fluid reten-
tion, and leg cramps. In some women,
oestrogen therapy may increase the risk
of abnormal blood clotting. Women tak-
ing HRT in the long term are thought to
be at a slightly increased risk of breast
cancer, but are thought to be less likely
to develop coronary artery disease. 
horn, cutaneous A hard, noncancer-
ous protrusion occasionally found on
the skin of elderly people and caused by
an overgrowth of keratin. 
Horner＊s syndrome A group of phys-
ical signs (narrowing of the eye pupil,
drooping of the eyelid, and absence of
sweating) affecting 1 side of the face
that indicates damage to part of the
sympathetic nervous system (see  auto-
nomic nervous system). 
horseshoe kidney A congenital abnor-
mality in which the 2 kidneys are fused
at the base, forming a horseshoe shape.
The joined kidneys usually function
normally, but may be associated with
other congenital kidney defects.
hospice A hospital or part of a hospital
devoted to the care of patients who are
terminally ill (see dying, care of the).
hospitals, types of Most of the hospitals
in the UK are part of the National Health
Service. Each NHS district has a general
hospital providing services that include
medicine, surgery, gynaecology, obstetrics,
and  paediatrics. Some more specialist
services are concentrated in fewer cen-
tres. Many of the UK＊s private hospitals
are nursing homes for the elderly; others
cater for nonemergency surgery, obstetric
care, or inpatient care for the mentally ill.
hot flushes Temporary reddening of the
face, neck, and upper trunk that is
accompanied by a sensation of heat
and is often followed by  sweating. Hot
flushes are usually caused by decreased
oestrogen production during or after the
menopause, and they sometimes occur
following removal of the ovaries (see
oophorectomy). Hot flushes can often
be alleviated by treatment with  hor-
mone replacement therapy (HRT). 
HOOKWORM INFESTATION HOT FLUSHES
H287
housemaid＊s knee Inflammation of the
bursa that acts as a cushion over the
kneecap. The inflammation is usually
caused by prolonged kneeling but may
develop after a blow to the front of the
knee. (See also bursitis.)
HPV The abbreviation for  human papil-
lomavirus.
HRT See hormone replacement therapy.
5HT See  serotonin agonists;  serotonin
antagonists.
human chorionic gonadotrophin See
gonadotrophin, human chorionic.
human genome See genome, human.
human leukocyte antigen(HLA) A
type of protein belonging to the group
known as  histocompatibility antigens,
which play a role in the immune system.
human papillomavirus A type of virus
that is responsible for warts and genital
warts. There are over 50 strains of human
papillomavirus. Infection with some of
these strains is thought to be a causative
factor in cervical cancer and anal cancer.
humerus The bone of the upper arm. The
dome-shaped head of the bone lies at an
angle to the shaft and fits into a socket
in the scapula to form the shoulder
joint. Below its head, the bone narrows
to form a cylindrical shaft. It flattens
and widens at its lower end, forming a
prominence on each side called an epi-
condyle. At its base, it articulates with
the ulna and radius to form the elbow. 
humerus, fracture of The humerus is
most commonly fractured at its neck
(the upper end of the shaft, below the
head), particularly in elderly people.
Fractures of the shaft occur in adults of
all ages. Fractures of the lower humerus
occur most commonly in children. 
An  X-ray can show a fracture of the
humerus. A fracture of the bone＊s neck
usually requires only a sling to immobi-
lize the bone; a fracture of the shaft or
lower bone normally needs a plaster
cast. Most fractures of the humerus heal
in 6每8 weeks.
humours Liquid or jelly-like substances
in the body. The term humours usually
refers to the  aqueous humour and  vit-
reous humour that occur in the eye.
hunchback See kyphosis.
hunger A disagreeable feeling caused
by the need for food. Hunger occurs
when the stomach is empty and the
blood glucose level is low, often follow-
ing strenuous exercise. In response to
these stimuli, messages from the hypo-
thalamus cause the muscular stomach
wall to contract in a rhythmic manner;
these contractions, if they are pro-
nounced, produce hunger pains.
Hunger due to a low blood sugar level
can also occur in  thyrotoxicosis, and in
diabetes mellitus when an incorrect bal-
ance between insulin and carbohydrate
intake causes hypoglycaemia. 
Huntington＊s disease An uncommon
disease in which degeneration of the
basal ganglia results in chorea and dem-
entia. Symptoms of Huntington＊s disease
do not usually appear until age 35每50.
The disease is due to a defective  gene
and is inherited in an autosomal domi-
nant manner (see genetic disorders). 
The chorea usually affects the face,
arms, and trunk, resulting in random
grimaces and twitches, and clumsiness.
Dementia takes the form of irritability,
personality and behavioural changes,
memory loss, and apathy. 
At present, there is no cure for Hunt-
ington＊s disease, and treatment is aimed
at reducing symptoms with drugs.
Hurler＊s syndrome A rare, inherited
condition caused by an  enzyme defect.
The syndrome is a type of inborn error
of metabolism (see metabolism, inborn
HURLER＊S SYNDROME HOUSEMAID＊S KNEE
H
HUMERUS
Humerus
Scapula
Ulna
Radius
Epicondyles
Clavicle
Rib288
errors of) in which there is an abnormal
accumulation of substances known as
mucopolysaccharides in the tissues.
Affected children may appear normal
at birth but, at 6每12 months of age, they
develop cardiac abnormalities, umbil-
ical  hernia, skeletal deformities, and
enlargement of the tongue,  liver, and
spleen. Growth is limited and mental
development slows. If the condition is
diagnosed in early infancy, a bone mar-
row transplant may be curative.
hydatid disease A rare infestation that
is caused by the larval stage of the
small tapeworm  ECHINOCOCCUS GRANU-
LOSUS (see tapeworm infestation). Larvae
mostly settle in the liver, lungs, or mus-
cle, causing the development of cysts.
In rare cases, the brain is affected. 
The infestation is generally confined
to dogs and sheep, but may be passed
on to humans through accidental inges-
tion of worm eggs from materials
contaminated with dog faeces.
The cysts grow slowly, and symptoms
may not appear for some years. In many
cases, there are no symptoms. Cysts in
the liver may cause a tender lump or
lead to  bile duct obstruction and  jaun-
dice. Cysts in the lungs may press on an
airway and cause inflammation; rupture
of a lung cyst may cause chest pain, the
coughing up of blood, and wheezing.
Cysts in the brain may cause  seizures.
Ruptured cysts may rarely cause  ana-
phylactic shock, which can be fatal.
Diagnosis of hydatid disease is by CT
scanning or MRI. The cysts are usually
drained or removed surgically. 
hydatidiform mole An uncommon non-
cancerous tumour that develops from
placental tissue early in a pregnancy in
which the embryo has failed to develop
normally. The mole, which resembles a
bunch of grapes, is caused by degenera-
tion of the chorionic villi. The cause of
the degeneration is unknown. In a small
number of affected pregnancies, the
mole develops into a choriocarcinoma.
Vaginal bleeding and severe morning
sickness generally occur.  Ultrasound
scanning reveals the tumour. Urine and
blood tests detect excessive amounts of
human chorionic gonadotrophin (see
gonadotrophin, human chorionic), which
is produced by the tumour. The tumour
can be removed by suction, a D and C,
or, less commonly, a hysterectomy. 
hydralazine An  antihypertensive drug
used principally as an emergency treat-
ment for hypertension. Hydralazine may
cause nausea, headache, dizziness, ir-
regular heartbeat, loss of appetite, rash,
and joint pain. Taken long term in high
doses it may cause lupus erythematosus.
hydramnios See polyhydramnios.
hydrocele A soft, painless swelling in
the scrotum caused by the space around
a  testis filling with fluid. A hydrocele
may be caused by inflammation, infec-
tion, or injury to the testis; occasionally,
the cause is a tumour. More often, there
is no apparent cause. Hydroceles com-
monly occur in middle-aged men, and
treatment is rarely necessary. If the
swelling is uncomfortable or painful,
however, the fluid may be withdrawn
through a needle. Recurrent swelling
may be treated by surgery.
hydrocephalus An excessive amount
of cerebrospinal fluid, usually under in-
creased pressure, within the skull. The
condition may be present at birth, when
it is often associated with other abnor-
malities, such as spina bifida, or it may
develop as a result of major head injury,
brain  haemorrhage, infection (such as
meningitis), or a tumour.
With  congenital hydrocephalus, the
main feature is an enlarged head that
continues to grow rapidly. Other features
include rigidity of the legs, vomiting,
HYDATID DISEASE HYDROCEPHALUS
H
Vas deferens
Epididymis
Hydrocele
Scrotum
HYDROCELE
Penis
Testis289
epilepsy, irritability, lethargy, and the
absence of normal reflex actions. If it is
not treated, hydrocephalus progresses
to severe brain damage, which may
result in death within weeks. When the
condition occurs later in life, symptoms
include headache, vomiting, loss of
coordination, and the deterioration of
mental function.
In most cases, treatment of hydro-
cephalus is by draining the fluid from
the brain to another part of the body,
such as the abdominal cavity, where it
can be absorbed. 
hydrochloric acid A strong acid re-
leased by the stomach lining. This acid
forms part of the stomach juices and
helps to digest proteins.
hydrochlorothiazide A  thiazidediur-
etic drug used to reduce  oedema in
people with heart failure, nephrotic syn-
drome, and cirrhosis. It is also given for
hypertension. Adverse effects include
leg cramps, dizziness, rash, and impo-
tence. The drug may rarely cause  gout
and may aggravate diabetes mellitus. 
hydrocortisone A  hormone produced
naturally by the  adrenal glands. Syn-
thetic hydrocortisone is used as a
corticosteroid drug to treat inflammatory
or allergic conditions, such as  ulcerative
colitis or dermatitis. Used in excess, hydro-
cortisone creams may thin the skin. 
hydrogen peroxide An  antiseptic sol-
ution used to treat infections of the skin
or mouth and to bleach hair. 
hydronephrosis A condition in which
a kidney becomes swollen with urine as
a result of an obstruction in the urinary
tract. Many people with hydronephrosis
have a congenital narrowing of the ure-
ter. The obstruction of a ureter may be
caused by a stone (see calculus, urinary
tract), a kidney tumour, or a blood clot.
Occasionally, hydronephrosis is caused
by obstruction to the outflow of urine
from the bladder by an enlarged pros-
tate gland (see prostate, enlarged).
Acute hydronephrosis, with sudden
blockage of the ureter, causes severe
pain in the loin. Chronic hydronephro-
sis, in which the obstruction develops
slowly, may cause no symptoms until
total blockage results in kidney failure. If
the blockage can be removed surgically,
the kidney is likely to function normally
again. Occasionally, however, a kidney is
so badly damaged that it requires re-
moval (see nephrectomy).
hydrophobia A popular term, now al-
most obsolete, for rabies. 
hydrops An abnormal accumulation of
fluid in body tissues or in a sac. 
hydrops fetalis Serious swelling, or
oedema, that occurs in a  fetus before
birth. Hydrops fetalis is often the result
of Rhesus incompatibility (see haemolytic
disease of the newborn).
hydrotherapy The use of exercises in
water to aid recovery from injury or
improve mobility. Cold baths after an
injury can reduce swelling and bruising.
(See also heat treatment; ice-packs.)
hydroxocobalamin A long-acting syn-
thetic preparation of vitamin B12, given
by injection.
hygiene The science and practice of
preserving health. The word hygiene is
commonly equated with cleanliness, but
it can also refer to public health.
hygiene, oral See oral hygiene.
hygroma, cystic A  lymphangioma that
occurs around the head and neck, the
armpits, or the groin and contains clear
fluid. Cystic hygromas are usually pre-
sent from birth and disappear naturally
from the age of about 2. 
hymen The thin membrane around the
vaginal opening. The hymen has a central
perforation which is usually stretched
or torn by the use of tampons or during
sexual intercourse for the 1st time.
Imperforate hymen is a rare condition
in which the hymen has no perforation;
at the onset of menstruation, menstrual
blood collects in the  vagina, causing
lower abdominal pain. The condition is
easily corrected by a minor operation. 
hyoid A small, U-shaped bone situated 
centrally in the upper part of the neck. It
is not joined to any other bone but is
suspended by ligaments from the base
of the skull. It provides an anchor point
for the muscles of the tongue and of the
upper front part of the neck.
hyoscine An  anticholinergic drug pre-
scribed in 2 distinct forms. Hyoscine
butylbromide is used to relieve irritable
bowel syndrome. Hyoscine hydrobromide
is used to control motion sickness and to
HYOSCINE HYDROCHLORIC ACID
H290
reduce nausea in M谷ni豕re＊s disease. It is
also used in eye-drops to dilate the pupil
before an eye examination or surgery.
An injection of hyoscine hydrobromide
is often given as part of a premedication
because it dries secretions in the mouth
and lungs. Possible adverse effects of
both forms include dry mouth, blurred
vision, drowsiness, and constipation.
hyper- A prefix meaning above, exces-
sive, or greater than normal.
hyperacidity A condition in which ex-
cess acid is produced by the stomach.
Hyperacidity is often confused with acid
reflux or waterbrash. It occurs in people
with a duodenal ulcer (see peptic ulcer)
or Zollinger每Ellison syndrome.
hyperactivity A behaviour pattern in
which children are overactive and have
difficulty in concentrating. The occasional
occurrence of such  behaviour in small
children is considerednormal. However,
persistent hyperactivity is known as
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), which may require treatment.
hyperacusis An excessively sensitive
sense of hearing. In hyperacusis, expo-
sure to loud noises may cause pain or
discomfort in the ears. 
hyperaldosteronism A metabolic dis-
order caused by an overproduction of
the hormone aldosterone by the adrenal
glands (see aldosteronism).
hyperalimentation Administration of
excessive amounts of  calories, usually
intravenously or by stomach tube (see
feeding, artificial).
hyperbaric oxygen treatment A meth-
od of increasing the amount of oxygen
in the tissues. This is achieved by plac-
ing a person in a special chamber and
exposing him or her to oxygen at a
much higher atmospheric pressure than
normal. Hyperbaric oxygen treatment is
used to treat poisoning from  carbon
monoxide and in cases of gas gangrene.
hyperbilirubinaemia A raised blood
level of bilirubin. It may be undetectable
except by a blood test, but  jaundice
occurs if the blood bilirubin rises to
twice the normal level.
hypercalcaemia An abnormally high
level of calcium in the blood, commonly
caused by hyperparathyroidism. Cancer
may also cause hypercalcaemia, either
by spreading to bone or producing
abnormal hormones that cause bones
to release  calcium. Less commonly, the
conditionis a result of excessive intake
of vitamin D or of certain inflammatory
disorders, such as sarcoidosis.
Hypercalcaemia causes nausea, vom-
iting, lethargy, depression, thirst, and
passing urine excessively. Higher blood
levels of calcium produce confusion,
extreme fatigue, and muscle weakness.
Without treatment, the condition can re-
sult in cardiac arrhythmias, kidney failure,
coma, and even death. Long-standing
hypercalcaemia may cause nephrocalci-
nosis or kidney stones (see  calculus,
urinary tract). Diagnosis is by blood tests.
Treatment is of the underlying cause.
hypercapnia Excessive carbon dioxide
in the blood caused by failure of mech-
anisms, such as  breathing rate, that
normally control the carbon dioxide
levels in the blood. Hypercapnia leads
to respiratory acidosis.
hyperemesis The medical term for
excessive  vomiting, which may cause
dehydration and weight loss. When the
condition occurs in pregnancy, it is
known as hyperemesis gravidarum. 
hyperglycaemia An abnormally high
level of glucose in the blood that occurs
in people with untreated or inadequately
controlled diabetes mellitus. Hyperglycae-
mia may also occur in diabetics as a
result of an infection, stress, or surgery.
Features of the condition include passing
large amounts of urine, thirst, glycosuria,
and  ketosis. If severe, hyperglycaemia
may lead to confusion and coma, which
need emergency treatment with  insulin
and intravenous infusion of fluids. 
hypergonadism Overactivity of the go-
nads (testes or  ovaries) that results in
overproduction of  androgen hormones
or oestrogen hormones. Hypergonadism
may be due to disorders of the gonads
or a disorder of the pituitary gland that
results in overproduction of  gonado-
trophin hormones. During childhood,
the condition causes precocious sexual
development and excessive growth.
hyperhidrosis Excessive sweating, which
may be localized (affecting only the arm-
pits, feet, palms, or face) or affect all
body areas supplied by  sweat glands.
HYPER- HYPERHIDROSIS
HExcessive sweating may be caused by hot
weather, exercise, or anxiety. In some
cases it is due to an infection, thyrotoxi-
cosis, hypoglycaemia, or a nervous system
disorder. Usually, the disorder has no
known cause, and begins at puberty,
disappearing by the mid-20s or early 30s.
If hyperhidrosis is persistent and can-
not be controlled by  antiperspirants,
surgery may be considered to destroy
the nerve centres that control sweating. 
hyperkalaemia Abnormally high blood
levels of potassium, often due to failure
of the kidneys to excrete it.
hyperkeratosis Thickening of the skin＊s
outerlayer due to an increased amount
of  keratin. The most common forms of
hyperkeratosis affect small, localized
areas of skin and include corns, calluses
and warts. A rare, inherited form affects
the whole of the soles and palms. The
term hyperkeratosis may also be used
to describe thickening of the nails.
hyperlipidaemias Metabolic disorders
that are characterized by high levels of
lipids in the blood. Hyperlipidaemias may
be inherited or associated with another
disorder, such as hypothyroidism, diabetes
mellitus, kidney failure, or Cushing＊s syn-
drome. They may also be a result of use
of corticosteroid drugs. Hyperlipidaemias
are associated with  atherosclerosis and
coronary artery disease. 
The signs depend on the type of hyper-
lipidaemia and may include fatty nodules
in the skin or over joints, and a white line
around the rim of the cornea. Diagnosis
depends on blood tests. Treatment aims
to reduce blood lipid levels, usually by
a low-fat diet and lipid-lowering drugs. 
hypermetropia Commonly known as
longsightedness, hypermetropia is an
error of  refraction  that initially causes
difficulty in seeing near objects and
then affects distance vision. Hyper-
metropia tends to run in families. 
Hypermetropia is caused by the eye
being too short from front to back,
which results in images not being clearly
focused on the  retina. The error is pre-
sent from birth, but symptoms generally
do not appear until later life because
the focusing power of  accommodation,
which compensates for hypermetropia,
declines with age.
Glasses or  contact lenses with convex
lenses reinforce focusing power.
hypernephroma A type of kidney can-
cer, also known as renal cell carcinoma.
hyperparathyroidism Overproduc-
tion of parathyroid hormone by the
parathyroid glands that raises the calci-
um level in the blood (hypercalcaemia)
by removing calcium from bones. This
may lead to bone disorders, such as
osteoporosis. To try to normalize the
high calcium level, the kidneys excrete
large amounts of calcium in the urine,
which can lead to the formation of kid-
ney stones (see calculus, urinary tract).
Hyperparathyroidism is most often
caused by a small noncancerous tumour
of 1 or more of the parathyroid glands.It
may also occur when the glands be-
come enlarged for no known reason. It
usually develops after age 40 and is
twice as common in women as in men.
Hyperparathyroidism may cause de-
pression and abdominal pain. However,
often the only symptoms are those
caused by kidney stones. If hypercal-
caemia is severe, there may be nausea,
tiredness, excessive urination, confu-
sion, and muscle weakness.
HYPERMETROPIA
291
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM HYPERKALAEMIA
H
Light rays
from near
object
Retina
HYPERMETROPIA NORMALVISION
Light rays
focused
on retina
Cornea
Light rays
from near
object
Lens
Lens
Retina
Light rays
focused
behind
retina292
The condition is diagnosed by X-rays of
the hands and skull and by  blood tests.
Surgical removal of abnormal parathyroid
tissue usually cures the condition. If the
remaining tissue is unable to produce
enough parathyroid hormone, treatment
for hypoparathyroidism is required.
hyperplasia Enlargement of an organ
or tissue due to an increase in the
number of its cells. The new cells are
normal, unlike those of a tumour. Hyper-
plasia is usually the result of hormonal
stimulation. It may occur normally
(such as in the enlargement of breast
tissue in pregnancy) or it may indicate a
disorder. (See also hypertrophy.)
hyperplasia, gingival Abnormal en-
largement of the gums. Causes include
gingivitis, persistent breathing through
the mouth, the anticonvulsant drug
phenytoin, and ill-fitting dentures. Sur-
gical treatment may be needed.
hyperpyrexia A term for extremely
high body temperature.
hypersensitivity Overreaction of the
immune system to an antigen. There are
4 main types of hypersensitivity.
Type I is associated with allergy. After
a first exposure to an antigen, antibod-
ies are formed; these coat cells called
mast cells in various tissues. On second
exposure, the antigen and antibodies
combine, causing the mast cells to dis-
integrate and release chemicals that
cause the symptoms of asthma, allergic
rhinitis,  urticaria,  anaphylactic shock, or
other allergic illnesses.
In type II reactions, antibodies that
bind to antigens on cell surfaces are
formed, leading to possible destruction
of the cells. Type II reactions may lead
to  certain autoimmune disorders.
In type III reactions, antibodies com-
bine with antigens to form particles
called immune complexes. These lodge
in various tissues and activate further
immune system responses, leading to
tissue damage. This type of reaction is
responsible for  serum sickness and for
the lung disease allergic alveolitis.
In type IV reactions, sensitized T-lym-
phocytes (a class of white blood cell) bind
to antigens and release chemicals called
lymphokines, which promote an inflam-
matory reaction. Type IV reactions are
responsible for  contactdermatitis and
measles rash; they may also play a part
in ※allergic§ reactions to drugs. 
Treatment of hypersensitivity depends
on the type, cause, and severity. When
possible, exposure to the offending anti-
gen should be avoided. 
hypersplenism An overactivity of the
spleen resulting in, and associated with,
blood disease. One of the functions of
the spleen is to break down blood cells
as they age and wear out. An overactive
spleen may begin to destroy cells indis-
criminately, causing a deficiency of any
of the types of blood cell. In most cases,
the spleen will also be enlarged. Hyper-
splenism may be primary, occurring for
no known reason, but more commonly
it is secondary to another disorder in
which the spleen has become enlarged,
such as Hodgkin＊s disease or malaria.
Hypersplenism causes  anaemia and
thrombocytopenia, and there may be a
decrease in resistance to infection. Pri-
mary hypersplenism is treated with
splenectomy. Treatment of secondary
hypersplenism aims to control the cause.
hypertension Persistently raised blood
pressure exceeding about 140mmHg
(systolic) and 90mmHg (diastolic) at rest.
Hypertension is very common, particu-
larly in men, and its incidence is highest
in middle-aged and elderly people. 
Hypertension is usually symptomless
but may cause headaches and visual
disturbances when severe. It increases
the risk of stroke, coronary artery disease,
and  heart failure, and may eventually
lead to kidney damage and retinopathy.
In many cases, there is no obvious
cause. Factors associated with hyper-
tension include high alcohol intake, a
high-salt diet, obesity, a family history
of the condition, a sedentary lifestyle, a
high degree of stress, and smoking.
Specific causes include various kidney
disorders, certain disordes of the adre-
nal glands, pre-eclampsia, coarctation of
the aorta, and use of certain drugs. Tak-
ing the combined contraceptive pill can
increase the risk.
With mild to moderate hypertension,
if no underlying cause is found, lifestyle
changes are recommended, for exam-
ple, introducing regular exercise and
HYPERPLASIA HYPERTENSION
Hnot the same as hirsutism,which is due
to abnormal levels of male hormones. 
hypertrophy Enlargement of an organ
or tissue due to an increase in the size,
rather than number, of its constituent
cells. For example, skeletal muscles
enlarge in response to increased physi-
cal demands. (See also hyperplasia.) 
hyperuricaemia An abnormally high
level of uric acid in the blood. Hyperuri-
caemia may lead to  gout due to the
deposition of uric acid crystals in the
joints; it may also cause kidney stones
(see calculus, urinary tract) and tophus.
Hyperuricaemia may be caused by an
inborn error of metabolism (see metab-
olism, inborn errors of), by the rapid
destruction of cells in a disease such 
as  leukaemia, or by medication that
reduces the excretion of uric acid by the
kidneys, such as  diuretic drugs. Large
amounts of purine in the diet may also
cause hyperuricaemia.
Drugs such as  allopurinol or  sulfin-
pyrazone are prescribed for the duration
of the patient＊s life. Purine-rich foods
should be avoided. 
hyperventilation Abnormally deep or
rapid breathing that is usually caused
by  anxiety. Hyperventilation may also
occur as a result of uncontrolled  dia-
betes mellitus, oxygen deficiency, kidney
failure, and some lung disorders. 
Hyperventilation causes an abnormal
loss of carbon dioxide from the blood,
which can lead to an increase in blood
alkalinity. Symptoms include numbness
of the extremities, faintness, tetany, and
HYPERTRICHOSIS
293
stopping smoking. Biofeedback training
and relaxation techniques can help
reduce blood pressure. If self-help mea-
sures have no effect, or hypertension is
severe, 1 or a combination of antihyper-
tensive drugs may be given.
hyperthermia A medical term for very
high body temperature. 
hyperthermia, malignant A rapid rise
in body temperature to a dangerously
high level, brought on by general anaes-
thesia. The condition is rare. In most
cases, susceptibility is inherited; people
suffering from certain muscle disorders
may also be at risk. The patient＊s body
temperature rises soon after the anaes-
thetic is given. Emergencytreatment and
intensive care are needed.
hyperthyroidism The overproduction
of  thyroid hormones by an overactive
thyroid gland. The most common form
of hyperthyroidism is  Graves＊ disease,
which is an  autoimmune disorder. Less
commonly, the condition is associated
with the development of enlarged nod-
ules within the thyroid gland.
The characteristic signs of hyperthy-
roidism include weight loss, increased
appetite, increased sweating, intolerance
to heat, a rapid heart-rate, and protrud-
ing eyes. In severe cases, the thyroid
gland often becomes enlarged (see
goitre) and there is physical and mental
hyperactivity and muscle wasting.
The diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is
confirmed by measuring the level of
thyroid hormones present in the blood.
The condition can be treated with drugs
that inhibit the production of thyroid
hormones or by removal of part of the
thyroid gland. 
hypertonia Increased rigidity in a mus-
cle, which may be caused by damage to
its nerve supply or changes within the
muscle. Hypertonia causes episodes of
continuous muscle spasm. Persistent
hypertonia in limb muscles following a
stroke or head injury leads to spasticity. 
hypertrichosis Growth of excessive hair,
often in places that are not normally
hairy. Hypertrichosis often occurs as a
result of taking certain drugs (including
ciclosporin and  minoxidil). The term
hypertrichosis is also used to describe
hair growth in a mole. Hypertrichosis is
HYPERVENTILATION HYPERTHERMIA
H FEMALE WITH HYPERTRICHOSIS
Abnormal hair growtha sensation of not being able to take a
full breath. Breathing into a paper bag
may help to reduce the symptoms in
people with anxiety. 
hyphaema Blood in the front chamber
of the  eye, usually caused by an injury
that ruptures a small blood vessel in
the  iris or  ciliary body. Initially, there
may be blurred vision, but the blood
usually disappears completely within a
few days and vision is restored. 
hypnosis A trance-like state of altered
awareness characterized by extreme sug-
gestibility. Some psychoanalysts induce
a hypnotic state as a means of helping
patients remember and come to terms
with disturbing events. More often, hyp-
nosis is used to help patients to relax. It
may be useful in people suffering from
anxiety,  panic attacks, or  phobias, or in
those wishing to correct addictive habits.
hypnotherapy The use of hypnosis as
part of a psychological therapy.
hypnotic drugs Drugs that induce sleep
(see sleeping drugs).
hypo- A prefix meaning under, below, or
less than normal. 
hypoaldosteronism A rare deficiency
of the hormone  aldosterone, which is
produced by the  adrenal glands. The
condition may be caused by damage or
disease affecting the adrenal glands. It
may produce weakness, and is treated
by the drug fludrocortisone. 
hypocalcaemia An abnormally low level
of calcium in the blood. The most com-
mon cause is vitamin D deficiency. Rarer
causes include chronic kidney failure and
hypoparathyroidism. In mild cases, hypo-
calcaemia is symptomless; in severe
cases, it leads to tetany. It may also result
in bone softening, causing rickets in chil-
drenand osteomalacia in adults.
hypochondriasis A person＊s unrealis-
tic belief that he or she is suffering 
from a serious illness, despite medical
reassurance. Hypochondriacs worry con-
stantlyabout their health and interpret
any symptom, however trivial, as evi-
dence of disease.
Hypochondriasis may be a complica-
tion of other psychological disorders,
including  phobia,  obsessive每compulsive
disorder,  generalized anxiety disorder,
and brain diseases such as  dementia.
294
Other factors include social stresses
and personality type. Where possible,
treatment is of the underlying mental
disorder. Hypochondriasis without an
underlying cause is difficult to treat.
hypochondrium The region on each
side of the upper abdomen, situated
below the lower ribs.
hypoglossal nerve The 12th  cranial
nerve, which controls tongue movement.
hypoglycaemia An abnormally low level
of glucose in the blood. Almost all cases
of hypoglycaemia occur in people with
diabetes mellitus, in whom the pancreas
fails to produce enough  insulin, result-
ing in an abnormally high level of
glucose. To lower the blood glucose
level,  hypoglycaemic drugs or insulin
are given. Too high a dose of either can
reduce the blood glucose to too low a
level. Hypoglycaemia can also occur if a
diabetic person misses a meal or takes
strenuous exercise. Rarely, the condi-
tion can result from drinking too much
alcohol or from an insulin-producing
pancreatic tumour. 
The main symptoms include sweating,
hunger, dizziness, trembling, headache,
palpitations, confusion, and sometimes
double vision. Behaviour is often irra-
tional and aggressive. Coma may occur
in severe cases. Hypoglycaemia may
also be the cause of seizures and jittery
behaviour in newborns.
Sugar should be eaten at the first sign
of a diabetic attack. An injection of either
glucose solution or the hormone gluca-
gon may be given in an emergency.
hypoglycaemics, oral A group of anti-
diabetic drugs that are used to lower
blood glucose. Too high a dose may
provoke the onset of hypoglycaemia.
hypogonadism Underactivity of the tes-
tes or  ovaries. Hypogonadism may be
caused by disorders of the gonads or a
disorder of the pituitary gland that causes
deficient production of  gonadotrophin
hormones. In men, hypogonadism causes
the symptoms and signs of  androgen
hormone deficiency; in women, it causes
those of oestrogen deficiency.
hypohidrosis Reduced activity of the
sweat glands. Hypohidrosis is a feature
of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, a
rare, inherited, incurable condition that
HYPHAEMA HYPOHIDROSIS
H295
is characterized by reduced sweating
and is accompanied by dry, wrinkled
skin, sparse hair, small, brittle nails,
and conical teeth. Other causes of
hypohidrosis include  exfoliative der-
matitis and some anticholinergic drugs.
hypokalaemia A deficiency of potassium
in the blood. Hypokalaemia is usually
caused by excess fluid loss due, for
example, to severe diarrhoea, but which
may be the result of treatment with
diuretic drugs.
hypomania A mild degree of mania.
hypoparathyroidism Insufficient pro-
duction of parathyroid hormone by the
parathyroid glands. A deficiency of this
hormone results in low levels of calcium
in the blood (hypocalcaemia).
The most common cause of hypopara-
thyroidism is damage to the parathyroid
glands during surgery. Occasionally, the
parathyroid glands are absent from
birth, or they may cease to function for
no apparent reason.
A low blood calcium level may cause
tetany. Occasionally,  seizures similar to
those of an epileptic attack may occur.
The condition is diagnosed by  blood
tests. To relieve an attack of tetany, cal-
cium may be injected slowly into a vein.
To maintain the blood calcium at a nor-
mal level, a lifelong course of calcium
and vitamin D tablets is necessary.
hypophysectomy The surgical removal
or destruction (by means of a radioac-
tive implant) of the pituitary gland. This
may be performed to remove  pituitary
tumours or to treat some cancers of the
breast,  ovary, or  prostate gland, the
growth of which is stimulated by hor-
mones secreted by the pituitary gland. 
hypopituitarism Underactivity of the
pituitary gland, resulting in inadequate
production of 1 or more pituitary  hor-
mones. The effects depend on which
hormones are affected. Possible causes
are a  pituitary tumour, an abnormality
affecting the hypothalamus, or injury to
the pituitary gland. Hypopituitarism may
also follow surgery or  radiotherapy of
the pituitary gland. Treatment involves
replacing the deficient hormones.
hypoplasia The failure of an organ or a
body tissue to develop fully and to reach
its normal adult size. 
hypoplasia, enamel A defect in tooth
enamel (see  enamel, dental), usually
due to  amelogenesis imperfecta. It may
also be caused by vitamin deficiency,
injury, or infection of a primary tooth
that interferes with enamel maturation. 
hypoplastic left-heart syndrome A
very serious form of congenital heart
disease (see  heart disease, congenital).
The baby is born with a poorly formed
left  ventricle, often associated with
other heart defects. The  aorta is mal-
formed and blood can reach it only via a
duct (the ductus arteriosus) that links
the aorta to the pulmonary artery. 
At birth, the baby may seem healthy.
However, within a day or 2 the ductus
arteriosus naturally closes off and the
baby  collapses, becoming pale and
breathless.In  most cases, hypoplastic
left-heart syndrome cannot be treated
surgically, and most affected babies die
within a week. A few infants have been
treated with heart transplants.
hyposensitization A preventive treat-
ment of  allergy to specific substances,
such as grass pollens and insect venom.
Hyposensitization involves giving grad-
ually increasing doses of the allergen so
that the  immune system becomes less
sensitive to that substance. The treat-
ment, which may need to be repeated
annually for a few years, carries the risk
of anaphylactic shock.
hypospadias A congenital defect of the
penis, in which the opening of the ure-
thra is on the underside of the glans or
shaft. In some cases, the penis curves
downwards, a condition that is known
as called chordee. Hypospadias can usu-
ally be corrected by surgery.
hypotension The medical term for low
blood pressure. In its most common form,
known as postural hypotension, symp-
toms occur after abruptly standing or
sitting up. Normally, blood pressure in-
creases slightly with changes in posture;
in people with postural hypotension, this
normal increase fails to occur. Postural
hypotension may be a side effect of
antidepressant drugs or antihypertensive
drugs. It may also occur in people with
diabetes mellitus. Acute hypotension is
a feature of  shock, and may be caused
by serious injury or a disease such as
HYPOTENSION HYPOKALAEMIA
H296
myocardial infarction or  adrenal failure.
Treatment depends on the cause. In the
absence of serious disease, low blood
pressure is associated with decreased
risk from  cardiovascular disorders and
stroke. Symptomless hypotension does
not require treatment.
hypothalamus A region of the  brain,
roughly the size of a cherry, situated
behind the eyes and the thalamus.
The hypothalamus controls the sym-
pathetic nervous system (part of the
autonomic nervous system). In response
to sudden alarm or excitement, signals
are sent from higher regions of the
brain to the hypothalamus, initiating
sympathetic nervous system activity.
This causes a faster heartbeat, widening
of the pupils, an increase in breathing
rate and blood flow to muscles. 
Other nerve cells in the hypothalamus
are concerned with the control of body
temperature, thirst, and appetite for food.
The hypothalamus is also involved in
regulating sleep, motivating sexual be-
haviour, and determining mood and
emotions. It indirectly controls many
endocrine glands through its influence
on the pituitary gland.
Disorders of the hypothalamus are us-
ually due to an intracerebral haemorrhage
or a pituitary tumour. They have diverse
effects, ranging from hormonal disorders
to disturbances in temperature regula-
tion, and increased or decreased need
for food and sleep.
hypothermia A fall in body temperature
to below 35∼C. Most cases occur in sick,
elderly people exposed to low tempera-
tures. The body loses its sensitivity to
cold as it ages, becoming less able to re-
verse a fall in temperature. Babies also
have an increased risk of hypothermia
because they lose heat rapidly and can-
not easily reverse a fall in temperature. 
A person suffering from hypothermia
is usually pale and listless. The  heart-
rate is slow, the body is cold, and the
victim is often drowsy and confused. In
severe hypothermia, breathing becomes
slow and shallow, the muscles are stiff,
the victim may become unconscious,
and the heart may stop beating. 
Hypothermia is a medical emergency.
Treatment varies according to the age of
the victim. A young person may be placed
in a warm bath. An elderly victim is usu-
ally warmed gradually by being covered
with layers of heat-reflecting material in a
room temperature of 25∼C. When hypo-
thermia is life-threatening, victims may
be admitted to an intensive care unit for
controlled warming. This may be done by
withdrawing blood from the circulation,
warming it, and returning it to the body. 
hypothermia, surgical The deliberate
reduction of body temperature to prolong
the period for which the vital organs can
safely be deprived of their normal blood
supply during open heart surgery. Cold
reduces the rate of metabolism in tissues
and thus increases their tolerance to lack
of oxygen. Cooling may be achieved by
continuously instilling cold saline at
about 4∼C into the open chest cavity. 
hypothyroidism The underproduction of
thyroid hormones by an underactive  thy-
roid gland. Most cases are caused by an
autoimmune disorder such as Hashimoto＊s
thyroiditis. More rarely, hypothyroidism
results from the removal of part of the
thyroid gland to treat hyperthyroidism.
Symptoms include tiredness and leth-
argy. There may also be muscle weakness,
cramps, a slow heart-rate, dry skin, hair
loss, a deep and huskyvoice, and weight
gain. A syndrome called myxoedema, in
which the skin and other tissues thicken,
may develop. Enlargement of the thyroid
gland may also occur (see goitre). If the
condition occursin  childhood, it may
retard growth and normal development. 
The disorder is diagnosed by measur-
ing the level of thyroid hormones in the
blood. Treatment consists of replace-
ment therapy with the thyroid hormone
thyroxine; usually for life. 
hypotonia Abnormal muscle slackness.
Normally, a muscle that is not being
used has a certain inbuilt tension, but
in a number of disorders affecting the
nervous system (such as  Huntington＊s
disease) this natural tension is reduced.
hypotonia in infants Excessive limpness
in infants, also known as floppy infant
syndrome. Hypotonic babies cannot hold
their limbs up against gravity and so tend
to lie flat with their arms and legs splayed.
Hypotonia may be caused by Down＊s
syndrome or hypothyroidism and may be
HYPOTHALAMUS HYPOTONIA IN INFANTS
Han early feature of cerebral palsy. It occurs
in disorders of the spinal cord, such as
Werdnig每Hoffman disease, and in some
children who have muscular dystrophy.
hypovitaminosis Any condition that re-
sults from insufficiency of 1 or more
vitamins. Hypovitaminosis may be due to
an inadequate dietary intake or a diges-
tive disorder that causes malabsorption.
hypovolaemia An abnormally low vol-
ume of blood in the circulation, usually
following blood loss due to injury, inter-
nal bleeding, or surgery. It may also be
due to loss of fluid from diarrhoea and
vomiting. Untreated, it can lead to shock.
hypoxia An inadequate supply of  oxy-
gen to the tissues. Temporary hypoxia
may result from strenuous exercise. More
serious causes include impaired breath-
ing (see  respiratory failure),  ischaemia,
and severe anaemia. A rare cause is carbon
monoxide poisoning. Severe, prolonged
hypoxia may lead to tissue death.
Hypoxia in muscles forces the muscle
cells to produce energy  anaerobically,
which can lead to cramps. Hypoxia in
heart muscle may cause angina pectoris.
Hypoxia of the brain causes confusion,
dizziness, and incoordination, causing
unconsciousness and death if persistent.
Hypoxia can be assessed by using an
oximeter to measure the oxygen concen-
tration of blood in the tissues. Severe
hypoxia may require oxygen therapy or
artificial ventilation. 
hysterectomy Surgical removal of the
uterus. It is performed in order to treat
HYSTERECTOMY
fibroids, and cancer of the uterus (see
uterus, cancer of) or cervix (see  cervix,
cancer of). It may also be performed to
relieve heavy menstrual bleeding or
endometriosis, and to remove a pro-
lapsed uterus (see uterus, prolapse of). 
The most common type is a total hys-
terectomy, in which the uterus and
cervix are removed. Occasionally, the
fallopian tubes and ovaries are removed
as well. For cervical cancer, a radical
hysterectomy is performed, in which the
uterus, cervix and pelvic lymph nodes
are removed. Hysterectomy may be per-
formed through the vagina or through
an incision in the abdomen.
hysteria An old-fashioned term encom-
passing a wide range of physical or
mental symptoms attributed to mental
stress. Symptoms formerly grouped un-
der this term are now included in the
more specific diagnostic categories of
conversion disorder;  somatization disor-
der; dissociative disorders; and factitious
disorders. The term is still used loosely
to describe irrational behaviour.
hysterosalpingography An X-ray pro-
cedure in which a dye (radiopaque
contrast medium) is introduced into the
cavity of the  uterus via the  cervix to
make the uterus and fallopian tubes visi-
ble on X-rays. Hysterosalpingography is
used to investigate infertility.
hysteroscopy A technique that uses a
hysteroscope (see  endoscope) to diag-
nose disorders, such as uterine polyps,
inside the  uterus and  fallopian tubes.
Hysteroscopy can be performed under
local  anaesthesia. Minor surgery, such
as the removal of  fibroids, may also be
carried out through the hysteroscope.
297
HYSTEROSCOPY HYPOVITAMINOSIS
H
Area to be removed Fallopian tube
Uterus
Cervix
Vagina
TOTALHYSTERECTOMY
Ovary
SITE OF
INCISION298
iatrogenic A term meaning ※physician-
produced§. It can be applied to any
medical condition, disease, or adverse
event resulting from medical treatment.
IBS See irritable bowel syndrome.
ibuprofen A nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drug (NSAID) used as a painkiller
to treat conditions such as headache,
menstrual pain, and injury to soft tissues
(such as muscles and ligaments). The
drug＊s anti-inflammatory effect helps to
reduce the joint pain and stiffness that
occurs in types of arthritis. Side effects
may include abdominal pain due to
inflammation of the stomach lining,
nausea, heartburn, and diarrhoea.
ice-packs The means of applying ice to
the skin (in a towel or other material) in
order to relieve pain, stem bleeding, or
reduce inflammation. Cold causes the
blood vessels to contract, reducing blood
flow. Ice-packs are used to relieve pain
in a variety of disorders, including severe
headache. They are used on sports
injuries to minimize swelling and bruis-
ing, and they also help to stop bleeding
from small vessels, as in a nosebleed. 
ichthyosis A rare, inherited condition
in which the skin is dry, thickened, scaly,
and darker than normal due to abnormal
production of keratin. It usually appears
at or shortly after birth and improves
during childhood. Commonly affected
areas are the thighs, arms, and backs of
the hands. Lubricants, emulsifying oint-
ments, and bath oils are helpful.
icterus A term for jaundice.
ICSI See intracytoplasmic sperm injection.
id One of the 3 parts of the personality
(together with the  ego and  superego)
described by Sigmund Freud. The id is
the primitive, unconscious energy store
from which come the instincts for food,
love, sex, and other basic needs. The id
seeks simply to gain pleasure and avoid
pain. (See also psychoanalytic theory.)
idiopathic Of unknown cause. For exam-
ple, epilepsy with no apparent cause is
called idiopathic epilepsy.
idiopathic thrombocytopaenic pur-
pura (ITP) An autoimmune disorder in
which platelets are destroyed, leading to
bleeding beneath the skin (see purpura).
ileitis, regional An outdated name for
Crohn＊s disease.
ileostomy An operation in which the
ileum (lower part of the small intestine)
is cut and the end brought through the
abdominal wall and formed into an arti-
ficial opening called a stoma. Waste is
discharged from the remaining ileum
into a disposable bag (stoma bag) or
drained into a pouch made from the
end of the ileum and situated beneath
the skin (a procedure called a continent
ileostomy). In the latter, faeces draining
into the pouch are emptied regularly
through a soft catheter. An ileostomy
can be permanent or temporary. 
Permanent ileostomy is usually perfor-
med on people with severe, uncontrolled
ulcerative colitis. Temporary ileostomy is
sometimes done at the time of partial
colectomy (removal of part of the colon)
to allow the colon to heal before waste
material passes through it. It may also be
done as an emergency treatment for an
obstruction in the intestine. The stoma
is created from a loop of the intestine
that is brought to the surface. (This is
later reversed by a 2nd operation.)
During convalescence, patients are
given counselling and taught the practi-
cal aspects of stoma care or drainage of
continent ileostomies. Full recovery from
the operation takes about 6 weeks. 
ileum The final, longest, and narrowest
section of the small intestine. It is
joined at its upper end to the  jejunum
and at its lower end to the large intes-
tine (comprising the caecum, colon,
and rectum). The function of the ileum
is to absorb nutrients from food that
has been digested in the stomach and 
the first 2 sections of the small intes-
tine (the duodenum and the jejunum). 
Occasionally the ileum becomes ob-
structed, for example by pushing through
a weakness in the abdominal wall (see
hernia) or by becoming caught up with
scar tissue following abdominal surgery
IATROGENIC ILEUM
I
I299
(see  adhesion). Other disorders of the
ileum include Meckel＊s diverticulum and
diseases in which absorption  of nutri-
ents is impaired, such as  Crohn＊s
disease,  coeliac disease, tropical  sprue,
and lymphoma.
ileus, paralytic A failure, usually tem-
porary, of the normal contractility of the
muscles of the intestine. Paralytic ileus
commonly follows abdominal surgery
and may also be induced by severe
abdominal injury,  peritonitis, internal
bleeding, acute pancreatitis, or interfer-
ence with the blood or nerve supply to
the intestine. Symptoms include a
swollen abdomen, vomiting, and failure
to pass faeces. The condition is treated
by resting the intestine. A tube passed
through the nose or mouth into the
stomach or intestine removes accumu-
lated fluids and keeps the stomach
empty. Body fluid levels are maintained
by intravenous infusion (drip). 
ilium The largest of the hip-bones that
form part of the pelvis.
illness Perception by a person that he
or she is not well. Illness is a subjective
sensation; it may have physical or 
psychological causes. The term is also
used to mean disease or disorder.
illusion A distorted sensation based on
misinterpretation of a real stimulus (for
example, a pen is seen as a dagger). It is
differs from a  hallucination, in which a
perception occurs without any stimulus.
Usually, illusions are brief and can be
understood when explained. They may
be due to tiredness or anxiety, to drugs,
or to forms of brain damage.  Delirium
tremens is a classic inducer of illusions.
imaging techniques Techniques that
produce images of structures within the
body. The most commonly used and
simplest techniques are X-rays (to view
dense structures such as bone) and
contrast X-rays, in which a medium, such
as barium, that is opaque to X-rays is
introduced into the body. Contrast
X-ray techniques include  barium X-ray
examinations  (used to examine the
oesophagus, the stomach and the small
intestine); cholecystography (used to vis-
ualize the gallbladder and common bile
duct);  bronchography (to view the air-
ways connecting the windpipe to the
lungs); angiography and venography (to
provide images of the blood vessels);
intravenous urography  (to visualize the
kidneys and urinary tract); and  ERCP
(by which the pancreatic duct and bil-
iary system are examined). 
Many X-ray imaging techniques have
been superseded by newer procedures.
These include ultrasound scanning, MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging), PET scan-
ning, and radionuclide scanning. However,
X-rays are used in CT scanning. Some of
these techniques use computers to pro-
cess the raw imaging data and produce
the actual image. Others can produce im-
ages without a computer, although one
may be used to enhance the image.
imipramine A tricyclic  antidepressant
drug most commonly used as a long-
term treatment for depression. Possible
adverse effects include excessive sweat-
ing, blurred vision, dizziness, dry mouth,
constipation, nausea, and, in older men,
difficulty passing urine.
immersion foot A type of  cold injury,
also called trench foot, occurring when
the feet are wet and cold for a long
time. Initially, the feet turn pale and
have no detectable pulse; later, they
become red, swollen, and painful. If the
condition is ignored, muscle weakness,
skin ulcers, or gangrene may develop. 
immobility Reduced physical activity,
for example, through disease, injury, or
following major surgery. Immobility is
IMMOBILITY ILEUS, PARALYTIC
I
Duodenum
Colon
Caecum
ILEUM
Ileum
Jejunum
Stomach
Rectum300
particularly harmful in the elderly
because it causes muscle wasting and
progressive loss of function. 
Total immobility can produce compli-
cations including bedsores, pneumonia,
or  contractures. A common complica-
tion of partial immobility is  oedema
(fluid retention), which causes swelling
of the legs. Rarely, sluggish blood flow
encourages formation of a  thrombus
(abnormal blood clot) in a leg vein.
Regular  physiotherapy and adequate
nursing care are important for any per-
son who is totally immobile.
immobilization An orthopaedic term for
techniques used to prevent movement
of joints or displacement of fractured
bones so that the bones can unite prop-
erly (see fracture).
immune response The body＊s defensive
reaction to microorganisms, cancer cells,
transplanted tissue, and other substances
or materials that are recognized as anti-
genic or ※foreign§. The response consists
of the production of cells called lympho-
cytes, substances called  antibodies, or
immunoglobulins, and other substances
and cells that act to destroy the anti-
genic material. (See also immune system.)
immune system A collection of cells
and proteins that works to protect the
body from harmful microorganisms,
such as  bacteria,  viruses, and  fungi. It
also plays a role in the control of cancer
and is responsible for the phenomena
of allergy, hypersensitivity, and rejection
after transplantsurgery. 
The term innate immunity is given to
the protection that we are born with,
such as the skin and the mucous mem-
branes that line the mouth, nose, throat,
intestines, and vagina. It also includes
antibodies, or  immunoglobulins (protec-
tive proteins), that have been passed to
the child from the mother. If microor-
ganisms penetrate these defences, they
encounter ※cell-devouring§ white blood
cells called phagocytes, and other types
of white cells, such as natural cell-
killing (cytotoxic) cells. Microorganisms
may also meet naturally produced sub-
stances (such as  interferon) or a group
of blood proteins called the comple-
ment system, which act to destroy the
invading microorganisms. 
The 2nd part of the immune system,
adaptive immunity, comes into play
when the body encounters organisms
that overcome the innate defences.The
adaptive immune system responds
specifically to each type of invading
organism, and retains a memory of the
invader so that defences can be rallied
instantly in the future.
The adaptive immune system first must
recognize part of an invading organism
or tumour cell as an antigen (a protein
that is foreign to the body). One of 2
types of response 每 humoral or cellular 每
is then mounted against the antigen.
Humoral immunity is important in the
defence against bacteria. After a complex
recognition process, certain B-lympho-
cytes multiply and produce vast numbers
of antibodies that bind to antigens. The
organisms bearing the antigens are
then engulfed by phagocytes. Binding
of antibody and antigen may activate
the complement system, which increas-
esthe efficiency of the phagocytes. 
Cellular immunity is particularly im-
portant in the defence against viruses,
some types of parasites that hide within
cells, and, possibly, cancer cells. It in-
volves 2 types of T-lymphocyte: helper
cells, which play a role in the recognition
of antigens and activate the killer cells
(the 2nd type of T-lymphocyte), which
destroy the cells that have been invaded. 
Disorders of the immune system in-
clude immunodeficiency disorders and
allergy, in which the immune system
has an inappropriate response to usu-
ally innocuous antigens such as pollen.
In certain circumstances, such as after
tissue transplants,  immunosuppressant
drugs are used to suppress the immune
system and thus prevent rejection of
the donor tissue as a foreign organism.
immunity A state of protection against
disease through the activities of the
immune system. Innate immunity is pre-
sent from birth; acquired (adaptive)
immunity develops either through
exposure to invading microorganisms
or through immunization.
immunization The process of inducing
immunity as a preventive measure against
infectious diseases. Immunization may
be active or passive. In the passive form,
IMMOBILIZATION IMMUNIZATION
I301
antibodies are injected into the blood
to provide immediate but short-lived
protection against specific bacteria, vir-
uses, or toxins. Active immunization, also
called vaccination, primes the body to
make its own antibodies and confers
longer-lasting immunity.
Routine childhood immunization pro-
grammes exist for diseases such as
diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus (see
DPT vaccination), haemophilus influenza
(Hib), measles, mumps, and rubella (see
MMR vaccination), meningitis C, and
poliomyelitis. Additional immunizations
before foreign travel may also be neces-
sary (see travel immunization).
Most immunizations are given by injec-
tion, and usually have no after effects.
However, some vaccines cause pain and
swelling at the injection site and may
produce a slight fever or flu-like symp-
toms. Some may produce a mild form of
the disease. Very rarely, severe reactions
occur due, for example, to an allergy to
1 of the vaccine＊s components. Not all
vaccines provide complete protection.
Cholera and  typhoid fever vaccinations,
in particular, give only partial protection.
People with  immunodeficiencydisor-
ders, widespread  cancer, those taking
corticosteroid drugs, or those who have
previously had a severe reaction to a
vaccine should not be immunized.
Some vaccines should not be given to
young children or during pregnancy. 
immunoassay A group of laboratory
techniques, which include ELISA (en-
zyme-linked immunosorbent assay) and
radioimmunoassay, that are used in the
diagnosis of infectious diseases and
allergies, and in the measurement of hor-
mone levels in the blood. 
immunodeficiency disorders Disor-
ders in which there is a failure of the
immune system＊s defences to fight infec-
tion and tumours. They may be due to
an inherited or a  congenital defect or
may be the result of acquired disease.
The result is persistent or recurrent in-
fection, including those with organisms
that would not ordinarily cause disease,
and an undue susceptibility to certain
forms of cancer. The infections in people
with immunodeficiency disorders are
sometimes called opportunistic infections;
examples include  pneumocystic pneu-
monia, fungal infections, and widespread
herpes simplex infections. 
Congenital or inherited deficiencies can
occur in either of the 2 prongs of the
adaptive immune system: humoral or
cellular. Deficiencies of the humoral sys-
tem include hypogammaglobulinaemia
and agammaglobulinaemia. The former
may cause few or no symptoms, depend-
ing on the severity of the deficiency, but
agammaglobulinaemia can be fatal if
not treated with  immunoglobulin. Con-
genital deficiencies of T-lymphocytes
may lead to problems such as persis-
tent and widespread candidiasis (thrush).
A combined deficiency of both humoral
and cellular components of the immune
system, called severe combined immuno-
deficiency (SCID), is usually fatal in the
1st year of life unless treatment can be
given by bone marrow transplant.
Acquired immunodeficiency may be
due either to disease processes (such
as infection with  HIV, which leads to
AIDS) or damage to the immune system
as a result of its suppression by drugs.
Severe malnutrition and many cancers
can also cause immunodeficiency. Mild
immunodeficiency arises through a natu-
ral decline in immune defences with age.
immunoglobulin A type of protein found
in blood and tissue fluids, also known as
an antibody. Such proteins are produced
by B-lymphocytes (a type of white blood
cell), and their function is to bind to
substances in the body that are recog-
nized as foreign antigens. This bindingis
crucial for the  destructionof  antigen-
bearing microorganisms. Immunoglob-
ulins also play a key role in allergies and
hypersensitivity reactions.
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) is the major
class of immunoglobulin of the 5 in the
blood (IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM). Its
molecule consists of 2 parts: 1 binds to
an antigen; the other binds to other
cells, which then engulf the microor-
ganisms bearing the antigen.
Immunoglobulins can be extracted
from the blood of people who have rec-
overed from certain infectious diseases
and used for passive immunization.
immunoglobulin injection Adminis-
tration of  immunoglobulin preparations
IMMUNOGLOBULIN INJECTION IMMUNOASSAY
I302
(antibodies) to prevent or treat infectious
diseases. Such preparations, also known
as immune globulin or gammaglobulin,
work by passing on antibodies obtained
from the blood of people who have pre-
viously been exposed to these diseases.
The main use of these injections is to
prevent infectious diseases, such as
chickenpox, in people exposed to infec-
tion who are not already immune or are
at special risk (during cancer treatment,
for example). They are also given regu-
larly for immunodeficiency disorders. Side
effects include rash, fever, and pain and
tenderness at the injection site.
immunology The discipline concerned
with the immune system. Immunologists
study the immune system＊s functioning
and investigate and treat immune system
disorders, including  allergies,  autoim-
mune disorders, and  immunodeficiency
disorders such as AIDS. Immunologists
are also concerned with finding ways in
which the immune system can be stim-
ulated to provide immunity. In addition,
they play a role in  transplant surgery,
looking preoperatively for a good match
between recipient and donor organ, and
suppressing the recipient＊s immune sys-
temafter transplantation to minimize
the chances of organ rejection.
immunostimulant drugs A group of
drugs that increase the efficiency of the
body＊s immune system. Immunostimulant
drugs include  vaccines,  interferon and
aldesleukin (interleukin-2). Interferon is
used to treat persistent viral infections,
such as hepatitis C, and some types of
multiple sclerosis. Aldesleukin is usedin
the treatment of some types of cancer.
immunosuppressant drugs A group
of drugs that reduce the activity of the
immune system. They include  azath-
ioprine,  ciclosporin,  cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, and  prednisolone.  Immu-
nosuppressants are given to prevent
rejection after transplant surgery and to
slow the progress of  autoimmune dis-
orders such as  rheumatoid arthritis and
systemic lupus erythematosus.
The drugs work by suppressing the pro-
duction and activity of white blood cells
called  lymphocytes. Side effects vary,but
all the drugs increase the risk of infection
and of the development of certain cancers.
immunotherapy Stimulation of the im-
mune system as a treatment for cancer.
The term is also used to describe hypo-
sensitization treatment for  allergy. One
type of immunotherapy usedin the treat-
ment of cancer uses  immunostimulant
drugs. More recently, monoclonal anti-
bodies (see  antibody, monoclonal)
directed against tumours have been
produced artificially by  genetic engi-
neering.  Interferon or chemical poisons
can be linked to these antibodies to
increase their ability to destroy tumour
cells without damaging normal cells.
impaction, dental Failure of a tooth to
emerge completely from the gum. It may
occur because of overcrowding or when
a tooth grows in the wrong direction.
Impacted wisdom teeth are common,
and, if symptomless, may not need to
be removed. In some cases, however,
symptoms necessitate their removal.
impedance audiometry A hearing test
used to investigate the middle ear in
cases of conductive deafness.
imperforate Without an opening. The
term is used to describe a body struc-
ture, such as the  hymen or anus (see
anus, imperforate), in which a normal
perforation is lacking.
impetigo A highly contagious skin infec-
tion, common in children, that usually
occurs around the nose and mouth. It is
caused by bacteria (usually staphylo-
cocci) entering areas of broken skin. The
skin reddens and small, fluid-filled blis-
ters appear. The blisters tend to burst,
leaving moist, weeping areas that dry to
leave honey-coloured crusts. In severe
cases, there may be swelling of the lymph
nodes in the face or neck and fever. 
Topical antibiotic drugs can be used,
but if the conditionis widespread oral
IMMUNOLOGY IMPETIGO
I
IMPETIGO303
antibiotics are usually given. To prevent
spread of the infection, towels, flannels,
and pillowcases should not be shared.
Children should not go to school or mix
withothers until they have been treated
for the condition.
implant Any material, either natural or
artificial, inserted into the body for
medical or cosmetic purposes. For exam-
ple,artificial joints can replace diseased
structures and breast implants can
improve appearance. Implants are also
used to maintain proper functioning of
an internal organ, treat certain disor-
ders, or deliver drugs or hormones.
implantation, egg Attachment of a
fertilized ovum (egg) to the wall of the
uterus. It occurs about 6 days after fertil-
ization, when the blastocyst (early
embryo) comes into contact with the
wallof  the uterus. As the cells of the
developing  embryo continue to divide,
the outer cell layer penetrates the lining
of the uterus to obtain oxygen and
nutrients from the mother＊s blood; later,
this layer develops into the placenta. The
embryo usually implants in the upper
part of the uterus; if it implants low down
near the cervix,  placenta praevia may
develop. Rarely, implantation occurs out-
side the uterus, possibly in a fallopian
tube, resulting in an ectopic pregnancy. 
implant, dental A post, surgically em-
bedded in the jaw for the attachment of
a dental prosthesis (an artificial tooth).
Titanium or synthetic materials may be
used. A dental implant is fitted under
local anaesthesia. A hole is drilled in the
jaw and a post inserted. Several months
later, an attachment that protrudes from
the gum is screwed into the post; a few
weeks after that, the prosthesis is fitted.
impotence Inability to achieve or main-
tain an  erection, usually caused by
psychological factors, including concerns
about performance or relationshipdiffi-
culties. In about 1 in 10 cases, the cause
is a physical disorder, such as diabetes
mellitus, or a neurological disorder, such
as damage to the spinal cord. Some drugs
cause impotence as a side effect, but this
reverses when the drugs are stopped.
Treatment may include  counselling or
sex therapy for psychological problems.
The drug sildenafil is used to treat both
organic and psychological impotence, but
side effects may occur. Other treatments
include self-administered injections into
the penis and a surgical implant, which
can produce a sustained erection. 
impression, dental A mould taken of
the teeth, gums, and palate. A quick-set-
ting material, such as alginate, is placed
in a mould over the teeth. The mould is
removed, and plaster of Paris is poured
into it to obtain a model of the area.
This model is then used as a base on
which to build a denture, bridge, or den-
tal  inlay. Dental impressions are also
used in orthodontics to study the position
of the teeth and to make  orthodontic
appliances to correct irregularities.
incest Sexual intercourse between close
relatives, such as with a parent, a son or
daughter, a brother or sister, an uncle or
aunt, a nephew or niece, or a grandpar-
ent or grandchild. It is illegal or taboo
in most societies and against the teach-
ing of many religions. 
incidence One of the 2 principal mea-
sures (the other is  prevalence) of how
common a disease is in a defined popu-
lation. The incidence of a disease is the
number of new cases that occur during
a given period (for example, 17 new
cases per 100,000 people per year). 
incision A cut made into the tissues of
the body by a scalpel (surgical knife).
Most incisions are made to gain access
to tissue inside the body, usually to
repair or remove a diseased organ. An
incision may also be made to allow pus
to drain from an abscess or boil.
incisional hernia A type of  hernia in
which the intestine bulges through a
INCISIONAL HERNIA IMPLANT
I
Implant
Natural
tooth
Bone
Artificial tooth
IMPLANT, DENTAL
Gum304
scarred area of the abdominal wall
because the muscle has been weakened
by a previous surgical incision.
incisor One of the 8 front teeth (4 in the
upper jaw and 4 in the lower) used for
cutting through solid food (see teeth).
incontinence, faecal Inability to retain
faeces in the  rectum until a movement
appropriate to expel them. A common
cause is  faecalimpaction, which often
results from long-standing constipation.
Therectum becomes overfull causing
faecal fluid and small pieces of faeces to
be passed involuntarily around the im-
pacted mass of faeces. Temporary loss
of continence may also occur in severe
diarrhoea. Other causes include injury
to the anal muscles (as may occur during
childbirth), paraplegia, and dementia.
If the underlying cause of faecal im-
paction is constipation, recurrence may
be prevented by a high-fibre diet. Sup-
positories containing glycerol or  laxative
drugs may be recommended. Faecal in-
continence in people with dementia or
a nerve disorder may be avoided by reg-
ular use of  enemas or  suppositories to
empty the rectum.
incontinence, urinary Involuntary pass-
ing of  urine, often due to injury or
disease of the  urinary tract. There are
several types. Stress incontinence refers
to the involuntary escape of urine when
a person coughs, picks up a heavy pack-
age, or moves excessively. It is common
in women, particularly after childbirth,
when the urethral sphincter muscles are
stretched. In urge incontinence, also
known as irritable bladder, an urgent
desire to pass urine is accompanied by
inability to control the bladder as it con-
tracts. Once urination starts, it cannot
be stopped. Total incontinence is a com-
plete lack of bladder control due to an
absence of sphincter activity, which may
be associated with spinal cord damage.
Overflow incontinence occurs in long-
term urinary retention, often because of
an obstruction such as an enlarged
prostate gland. The bladder is always full,
leading to constant dribbling of urine. 
Incontinence may also be due to urin-
ary tract disorders (including infections,
bladder stones, or tumours) or prolapse
of the uterus or vagina. Incontinence due
to lack of control by the brain commonly
occurs in the young (see enuresis) or eld-
erly and those with learning difficulties. 
If weak pelvic muscles are causing
stress incontinence, pelvic floor exercises
may help. Sometimes, surgery may be
needed to tighten the pelvic muscles or
correct a prolapse. Anticholinergic drugs
may be used to relax the bladder mus-
cle if irritable bladder is the cause. 
If normal bladder function cannot be
restored, incontinence pants can be worn;
men can wear a penile sheath leading
into a tube connected to a urine bag.
Some people can avoid incontinence by
self-catheterization (see catheterization,
urinary). Permanent catheterization is
necessary in some cases.
incoordination Loss of the ability to
produce smooth, muscular movements,
leading to clumsiness and unsteady bal-
ance.Incoordination can also mean the
failure of a group of organs to work
together successfully. (See also ataxia.)
incubation period  The time during
which an  infectious disease develops,
from the point when the infecting organ-
ism enters the body until symptoms
appear. Different infections have charac-
teristic incubation periods; for example,
14每21 days for chickenpox and 7每14 days
for measles. The incubation period for
cholera may be as short as several hours.
incubator A transparent plastic cot in
which oxygen, temperature, and humid-
ity are controlled in order to provide
premature or sick infants with ideal
conditions for survival. Incubators have
portholes to allow handling of the baby
and smaller ones through which mon-
itoring cables and intravenous and
respiratory tubing can pass.
incus One of the 3 tiny, linked bones
(ossicles) in the middle  ear. The incus
(the Latin name for anvil) is so-called
because of its shape.
Indian medicine Traditional Indian, or
Ayurvedic, medicine was originally based
largely on herbal treatment, although
simple surgical techniques were also
used. Indian medicine later developed
into a scientifically based system with a
wide range of surgical techniques (such
as operations for cataracts and kidney
stones) along with the herbal tradition. 
INCISOR INDIAN MEDICINE
Iindigestion  A common term (known
medically as dyspepsia) covering a var-
iety of symptoms brought on by eating,
including  heartburn,  abdominal pain,
nausea, and  flatulence. Discomfort in
the upper abdomen is often caused by
eating too much, too quickly, or by eat-
ing very rich, spicy, or fatty foods.
Persistent or recurrent indigestion may
be due to a peptic ulcer, gallstones, oes-
ophagitis, or, rarely,  stomach cancer.
Antacid drugs help relieve symptoms,
but they can mask an underlying cause
that needs medical attention. They
should not be taken for longer than 2
weeks without medical advice.
indometacin A nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
matory drug (NSAID) used to relieve
pain, stiffness, and inflammation in dis-
orders such as osteoarthritis, rheumatoid
arthritis, and  tendinitis. It is also pre-
scribed to relieve pain caused by injury
to soft tissues, such as muscles and lig-
aments. Side effects include abdominal
pain, nausea, heartburn, headache, dizzi-
ness, and increased risk of peptic ulcer.
induction of labour Use of artificial
means to initiate childbirth when the
health of the mother or baby would be at
risk if pregnancy continued. The most
common reason for inducing labour is
that the pregnancy has continued past
the estimated delivery date, which increas-
esthe chance of complications during
childbirth. Other reasons for induction
are pre-eclampsia,Rhesus incompatibility,
or  intrauterine growth retardation. Differ-
ent methods of induction are used,
depending onthe stage of labour: a
prostaglandin pessary may be inserted
into the vagina to  encourage the cervix
to open; if the cervixis already open, the
membranes containing the fetus may be
ruptured; or thehormone  oxytocin may
be given intravenously to stimulate
uterine contractions.
industrial diseases See  occupational
disease and injury. 
infant A term usually applied to a baby
up to the age of 12 months. 
infantile spasms A rare type of recur-
rent seizure, also called progressive
myoclonic encephalopathy or salaam
attacks, that affects babies. The condi-
tion is a form of  epilepsy and occurs
most commonly from 4每9 months of age.
Spasms may occur hundreds of times a
day, each lasting a few seconds. These
seizures are usually a sign of brain dam-
age; affected babies usually have severe
developmental delay.
infant mortality The number of infants
who die during the 1st year of life per
1,000 live births, usually expressed as
per year. About 2 in 3 of all infant
deaths occur during the neonatal period
(the 1st month of life). Most of those
who die are very premature (born before
the 30th week of pregnancy) or have
severe birth defects. 
INDUCTIONOFLABOUR
305
INFANT MORTALITY INDIGESTION
I
Closed
cervix
Fetus Cervix Placenta Amniotic
fluid
Membranes
surrounding
fetus
Prostaglandin
pessary softens
the cervix
RUPTURE OF MEMBRANES PROSTAGLANDIN PESSARY
Hand guiding hook
that ruptures
membranes306
infarction Death of an area of tissue
due to ischaemia (lack of blood supply).
Common examples include myocardial
infarction, which is also known as heart
attack, and pulmonary infarction, which
is lung damage caused by a pulmonary
embolism 每 a blood clot that has moved
into a vessel in the lung and is obstruct-
ing the flow of blood. (See also necrosis.)
infection The establishment in the body
of disease-causing microorganisms (such
as bacteria, viruses, or fungi). The organ-
isms reproduce and cause disease by
direct damage to cells or by releasing
toxins. This normally provokes the im-
mune system into  responding,  which
accounts for many common symptoms.
Infection can be localized within a par-
ticular area or tissue, as in a boil, or be
systemic (spread throughout the body),
as in influenza. Weakness, aching joints,
and fever are expressions of systemic
infectious disease. Localized infection
mayresult from the spread of organisms
through wounds, or during surgery. Lo-
calized infection is generally associated
with pain, redness, swelling, and forma-
tion of a pus-filled abscess at the site of
infection, and a rise in temperature.
Many minor infections are dealt with by
the immune system and need no speci-
fic treatment. Severe systemic infections
may need treatment with drugs such as
antibacterials or  antivirals. A localized
infection that has produced pus may be
drained surgically.
infection, congenital Infection acquired
in the uterus or during birth. Many micro-
organisms can pass from the mother, by
way of the placenta, into the circulation
of the growing fetus. Particularly ser-
ious infections acquired in the uterus
are  rubella,  syphilis,  toxoplasmosis, and
cytomegalovirus; all these infections may
cause  intrauterine growth retardation.
Rubella that occurs in early pregnancy
may cause  deafness, congenital  heart
disease, and eye disorders. Some infec-
tions in later pregnancy,particularly with
a  herpes virus, may also damage the
fetus severely. A woman infected with
HIV risks passing on the virus to her baby
during pregnancy, but the risk can be
reduced by use of  antiretroviral drugs
during the pregnancy.
Infections acquired during birth are
almost always the result of microorgan-
isms in the mother＊s vaginal secretions
or uterine fluid. Premature rupture of the
membranes is associated with increased
risk of infection, particularly streptococ-
cal. Conditions that can be acquired
during delivery include herpes, chlamy-
dial infections, and gonorrhoea.
Treatment of the baby depends on the
type of infection. Some birth defects
caused by infection (such as certain
types of heart defect) can be treated;
others (such as congenital deafness) are
usually not treatable.
infectious disease Any illness caused
by a specific microorganism. The most
important disease-causing organisms are
viruses,  bacteria, including rickettsiae,
chlamydiae, and mycoplasmas, and fungi.
Others are protozoa and worms.
In developed countries, infectious dis-
eases are generally less of a threat than
in the past because of better methods to
control the spread of disease organisms
(such as better sanitation and water puri-
fication); effective drugs;  immunization;
and better general health and nutrition.
For most infectious diseases, there is a
time gap between the entry of the micro-
organisms into the body and the 1st
appearance of symptoms. This incuba-
tion period, during which an infected
person is likely to pass the microorgan-
ism to others, may be a few hours, a few
days, or, in some cases, months.
Antibiotics and other antimicrobial
drugs are the mainstay of treatment for
bacterial infection. For viral infection,
however, drug treatment is restricted to
severe infections.
infectious mononucleosis See mono-
nucleosis, infectious.
inferiority complex A neurotic state of
mind that develops because of repeated
hurts or failures in the past. Inferiority
complex arises from a conflict between
the positive wish to be recognized as
someone worthwhile and the haunting
fear of frustration and failure. Attempts
to compensate for the sense of worth-
lessness may take the form of
aggression and violence, or an over-
zealous involvement in activities. (See
also superiority complex.)
INFARCTION INFERIORITY COMPLEX
I307
infertility The inability to produce off-
spring, which may result from a problem
in either the male or the female repro-
ductive system, or, in many cases, from
a combination of problems in both.
The main cause of male infertility is a
lack of healthy sperm. In  azoospermia,
no sperm are produced; in oligospermia
only a few sperm are produced. In some
cases, sperm are produced but are mal-
formed or short-lived. The underlying
cause of these problems may be block-
age of the spermatic tubes or damage
to the spermatic ducts, usually due to a
sexually transmitted infection. Abnormal
development of the testes due to an
endocrine disorder (see hypogonadism)
or damage to the testes by orchitis may
also cause defective sperm. Smoking,
toxins, or various drugs can lower the
sperm count. Other causes are disorders
affecting ejaculation (see ejaculation,
disorders of). Rarely, male infertility is
due to a chromosomal abnormality, such
as  Klinefelter＊s syndrome, or a genetic
disease, such as cystic fibrosis.
The most common cause of female
infertility is failure to ovulate. Other
causes are blocked, damaged or absent
fallopian tubes; disorders of the uterus,
such as fibroids and endometriosis; prob-
lems with  fertilization, or implantation
in the uterus (see  implantation, egg).
Infertility also occurs if the woman＊s
cervical mucus provides antibodies that
kill or immobilize her partner＊s sperm.
Rarely, a chromosomal abnormality, such
as Turner＊s syndrome, is the cause of a
woman＊s infertility. 
Investigations to discover the cause of
a woman＊s infertility may include blood
and urine tests, to check that ovulation
is occurring, and  laparoscopy to deter-
mine whether or not an abnormality is
present. The initial investigation for male
infertility is seminal fluid analysis. 
Treatment of male infertility is limited.
The only option for azoospermia is adop-
tion of children or artificial  insemination
by a donor. If the sperm countis low, arti-
ficial insemination by the malepartner
may be tried. In some cases of male
infertility due to a hormonal imbalance,
drugs such as  clomifene or  gonadotro-
phin hormone therapy may prove useful. 
Failure of the woman to ovulate re-
quires ovarian stimulation with a drug
such as clomifene, either with or without
a gonadotrophin hormone. Microsurgery
can sometimes repair damage to the
fallopian tubes. If surgery is unsuccess-
ful,  in vitro fertilization (IVF) is the only
option. Uterine abnormalities or disor-
ders, such as fibroids, may require
treatment. In some cases, provided the
woman has normal fallopian tubes,
gamete intrafallopian transfer  (GIFT) or
zygote intrafallopian transfer (ZIFT) may
be carried out. 
infestation The presence of animal par-
asites (such as mites, ticks, or lice) in
the skin or hair, or of worms (such as
tapeworms) inside the body.
infibulation A form of female circumci-
sion in which the labia majora (the
outer lips surrounding the vagina) are
removed and the entrance to the vagina
narrowed (see circumcision, female). 
infiltrate Build-up of substances or cells
within a tissue that are either not nor-
mally found in it or are usually 
present only in smaller amounts. Infil-
trate may refer to a drug (such as a local
anaesthetic) that has been injected into
a tissue, or to the build-up of a sub-
stance within an organ (for example, fat
in the liver caused by excessive alcohol
consumption). Radiologists use the term
to refer to the presence of abnormali-
ties, most commonly on a  chest X-ray,
due to conditions such as infection.
inflammation Redness, swelling, heat,
and pain in a tissue due to injury or
infection. When body tissues become
damaged, mast cells release the chemical
histamine and other substances. His-
tamine increases the flow of blood to
the damaged tissue and also makes the
blood capillaries more leaky; fluid then
oozes out and into the tissues, causing
localized swelling. Pain is causedby the
stimulation of nerve endings by the
inflammatory chemicals.
Inflammation is usually accompanied
by a local increase in the number of
white blood cells. These cells help to
destroy any invading microorganisms
and are involved in repairing the dam-
aged tissue. Inappropriate inflammation
(as in  rheumatoid arthritis and some
INFLAMMATION INFERTILITY
Iother  autoimmune disorders) may be
suppressed by corticosteroid drugs or by
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
inflammatory bowel disease A collec-
tive term for chronic disorders affecting
the small and/or large intestine that
cause abdominal pain, bleeding, and
diarrhoea.  Crohn＊s disease and  ulcera-
tive colitis are the most common types
of inflammatory bowel disease.
influenza A viral infection of the respira-
tory tract (air passages), typically causing
fever, headache, muscle ache, and weak-
ness. Popularly known as ※flu§, it is
spread by infected droplets from coughs
or sneezes. Influenza usually occurs in
small outbreaks or every few years in
epidemics. There are 3 main types of
influenza virus: A, B, and C. A person who
has had an attack caused by the type C
virus acquires  antibodies that provide
immunity against type C for life. Infec-
tion with a strain of type A or B virus
produces immunity to that particular
strain. However, type A and B viruses
are capable of altering to produce new
308
strains: type A has been the cause of
pandemics in the last century. 
Types A and B produce classic flu
symptoms; type C causes a mild illness
that is indistinguishable from a common
cold. The illness usually clears up com-
pletely within 7每10 days. Rarely, flu takes
a severe form, causing acute pneumonia
that may be fatal within a day or 2 even
in healthy young adults. Type B infec-
tions in children sometimes mimic
appendicitis, and they have been impli-
cated in Reye＊s syndrome. In the elderly
and those with lung or heart disease,
influenza may be followed by a bacterial
infection such as bronchitis or pneumonia.
Analgesic drugs (painkillers) help to
relieve aches and pains and reduce fever.
The antiviral drug amantadine may be
given if the person is elderly or has
another lung condition. Antibiotic drugs
may be used to combat secondary bac-
terial infection. 
Flu vaccines, containing killed strains
of the types A and B virus currently in
circulation, are available, but have only
a 60每70 per cent success rate. Immunity
is short-lived, and vaccination (recom-
mended for older people and anyone
suffering from respiratory or circulatory
disease) must be repeated annually.
infra-red A term denoting the part of the
electromagnetic spectrum immediately
beyond the red end of the visible light
spectrum. Directed onto the skin, infra-red
radiation heats the skin and the tissues
immediately below it. An infra-red lamp
is one means of giving heat treatment. 
infusion, intravenous See intravenous
infusion.
ingestion The act of taking any sub-
stance (for example, food, drink, or
medications) into the body through the
mouth. The term also refers to the pro-
cess by which certain cells (for example,
some white blood cells) surround and
then engulf small particles. 
ingrowing toenail See toenail, ingrow-
ing.
inguinal Relating to the groin (the area
between the abdomen and thigh), as in
inguinalhernia. 
inguinal hernia A type of  hernia in
which part of the intestine protrudes
through the abdominal wall in the
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASEINGUINAL HERNIA
I
Foreign
organism
Released
chemicals
White blood cell
White cell
engulfing
organism
White blood
cell leaving
blood vessel
INFLAMMATION
Injured skin
Inflamed
tissue
INJURED TISSUE
RESULTING INFLAMMATION309
groin. It can be direct, in which there is
a localized weakness in the abdominal
wall, or, in men, indirect, in which the
intestineprotrudes through the inguinal
canal, the passage through which the
testes descend into the scrotum.
inhalation The act of taking in breath
(see breathing). An inhalation is also a
substance, in the form of a gas, vapour,
powder, or aerosol, to be breathed in.
inhaler A device used for administering
a drug in powder or vapour form, used
mainly in the treatment of various res-
piratory disorders, including asthma and
chronic bronchitis. Metered-dose inhalers
deliver a precise dose when the inhaler is
pressed. Drugs taken by  inhalation in-
clude bronchodilators and corticosteroids.
inheritance The transmission of char-
acteristics and disorders from parents to
their children through the influence of
genes. Genes are the units of DNA (de-
oxyribonucleic acid) that are contained
in a person＊s cells; DNA controls all
growth and functioning of the body.
Half of a person＊s genes come from the
mother, half from the father. 
Genes are organized into chromosomes
in the cell nucleus. Genes controlling
most characteristics come in pairs, 1 from
the father, the other from the mother.
Everyone has 22 pairs of chromosomes
(called autosomes) bearing these paired
genes, in addition to 2 sex chromosomes.
Females have 2 X chromosomes; males
have an X and a Y chromosome.
Most physical characteristics, many
disorders, and some mental abilities
and aspects of personality are inherited.
The inheritance of normal traits and
disorders can be divided into those
controlled by a single pair of genes on
the autosomal chromosomes (unifactorial
inheritance, such as eye colour); those
controlled by geneson the sex chromo-
somes (sex-linked inheritance, such as
haemophilia); and those controlled by
the combination of many genes (multi-
factorial inheritance, such as height). 
Either of the pair of genes controlling
a trait may take any of several forms,
known as alleles. For example, the genes
controlling eye colour exist as 2 main
alleles, coding for blue and brown eye
colour. The brown allele is dominant over
blue in that it ※masks§ the blue allele,
which is called recessive to the brown
allele. Only 1 of the pair of genes con-
trolling a trait is passed to a child from
each parent. For example, someone with
the brown/blue combination for eye col-
our has a 50 per cent chance of passing
on the blue gene, and a 50 per cent
chance of passing on the brown gene, to
any child. This factor is combined with
the gene coming from the other parent,
according to dominant or recessive rela-
tionships, to determine the child＊s eye
colour. Certain genetic disorders are also
inherited in a unifactorial manner (for ex-
ample, cystic fibrosis and achondroplasia).
Sex-linked inheritance depends on the
2 sex chromosomes, X and Y. The most
obvious example is gender. Male gender
is determined by genes on the Y chro-
mosome, which is present only in males.
Any faults in a male＊s genes on the X
chromosome tend to be expressed out-
wardly because such a fault cannot be
masked by the presence of a normal gene
on a 2nd X chromosome (as it can in
females). Faults in the genes of the X
chromosome include those responsible
for colour vision deficiency, haemophilia,
and other sex-linked inherited disorders,
which almost exclusively affect males.
Multifactorial inheritance, along with
the effects of environment, may play a
part in causing certain disorders, such as
diabetes mellitus and neural tube defects.
inhibition The process of preventing any
mental or physical activity. Inhibition in
the brain and spinal cord is carried out
INHIBITION INHALATION
I
INHALER
Metered-dose
inhaler310
by certain  neurons, which damp down
the action of other nerve cells to keep the
brain＊s activity in balance. In psychoana-
lysis, inhibition refers to the unconscious
restraint of instinctual impulses.
injection Introduction of a substance into
the body from a syringe via a needle. In-
jections may be intravenous (into a vein),
intramuscular (into a muscle), intrader-
mal (into the skin), intra-articular (into a
joint), or subcutaneous (under the skin).
injury Harm to any part of the body. It
may arise from many causes, including
physical influences  (for example, force,
heat, cold, electricity,vibration, and radi-
ation), chemical causes (for example,
poisons), bites, or oxygen deprivation.
ink-blot test An outdated psychologi-
cal test in which the subject was asked
to interpret the appearance of a number
of ink blots. The most widely used exam-
plewas the Rorschach test.
inlay, dental A filling of porcelain or
gold used to restore a badly decayed
tooth. An inlay may be needed for the
back teeth or to protect a weakened tooth.
inoculation The act of introducing a
small quantity of a foreign substance
into the body, usually by injection, for
the purpose of stimulating the  immune
system to produce  antibodies (protec-
tive proteins) against the substance.
Inoculation is usually done to protect
against future infection by particular
bacteria or viruses (see immunization). 
inoperable A term applied to any con-
dition that cannot be alleviated or
cured by surgery, particularly cancers.
inorganic A term used to refer to any of
the large group of substances that do
not contain carbon and to a few simple
carbon compounds (for example, carbon
dioxide and carbon monoxide). Examples
of inorganic substances include table
salt (sodium chloride) and bicarbonate
of soda (sodium bicarbonate).
inpatient treatment Care or therapy
in hospital following admission.
inquest An official inquiry by a coroner
into a death that is of unknown cause or
is suspected of being unnatural.
insanity A term for serious mental dis-
order. The term has no technical meaning.
insect bites Puncture wounds inflicted
by bloodsucking insects such as  gnats,
mosquitoes, fleas, and lice. Most bites
cause only temporary pain or itching,
but some people have severe skin reac-
tions. In the tropics and subtropics,
insect bites are potentially more serious
because certain biting species can trans-
mit disease (see insects and disease). 
All insect bites provoke a skin reaction
to substances in the insect＊s saliva or
faeces, which may be deposited at or
near the site of the bite. Reactions vary
from red pimples to painful swellings or
an intensely itching rash; some insects,
such as bees and wasps, have stings
(see insect stings) that can produce fatal
allergies. (See also  lice;  spider bites;
mites and disease; ticks and disease.) 
insects and disease Relatively few in-
sect species cause disease directly in
humans. Some parasitize humans, living
under the skin or on the body surface (see
lice; chigoe; myiasis). The most trouble-
some insects are flies and biting insects.
Flies can carry disease organisms from
human or animal excrement via their feet
or legs and contaminate food or wounds.
A number of serious diseases are spread
by biting insects. These include malaria
and  filariasis (transmitted by mosqui-
toes),  sleeping sickness  (tsetse flies),
leishmaniasis (sandflies), epidemic typhus
(lice), and plague (rat fleas). Mosquitoes,
sandflies, and ticks can also spreadill-
nesses such as  yellow fever,  dengue,
Lyme disease, and some types of viral
encephalitis. Organisms picked up when
an insect ingests blood from an infected
animal or person are able to survive or
multiply in the insect. Later, the organ-
isms are either injected into a new human
host via the insect＊s saliva or deposited
in the faeces at or near the site of the bite.
Most insect-borne diseases are con-
fined to the tropics and subtropics,
although tick-borne Lyme disease occurs
in some parts of the UK. The avoidance
of insect-borne disease is largely a mat-
ter of keeping flies off food, discouraging
insect bites by the use of suitable cloth-
ing and insect repellents, and, in parts
of the world where malaria is present,
the use of mosquito nets and screens,
pesticides, and antimalarial tablets. 
insect stings Reactions produced by the
sting of insects such as bees and wasps.
INJECTION INSECT STINGS
I311
Venom injected by the insect contains
inflammatory substances that cause local
pain, redness, and swelling for about 48
hours. Any sting in the mouth or throat
is dangerous because the swelling may
obstruct breathing. About 1 person in 200
is allergic to insect venom, and a severe
allergic reaction can occur, leading to
anaphylactic shock. A procedure known
as  hyposensitization is sometimes rec-
ommended for such people. 
If the symptoms of anaphylactic shock
develop, it is essential to seek emergency
medical treatment. Any person who is
known to be hypersensitive to bee or
wasp venom should obtain and carry an
emergency kit for the self-injection of
adrenaline (epinephrine). 
insecurity Lack of self-confidence and
uncertainty about one＊s abilities, aims,
and relationships with others. A feeling
of insecurity may be a feature of anxiety
and other neurotic mental disorders.
insight Being aware of one＊s own men-
tal state. In a general sense, this means
knowing one＊s own strengths, weak-
nesses, and abilities. The term also has
the specific psychiatric meaning of
knowing that one＊s symptoms are an ill-
ness. Loss of insight may be a feature of
psychotic and neurotic disorders. 
in situ A Latin term meaning ※in place§.
The phrase ※carcinoma in situ§ is used
to describe tissue (particularly of the
skin or cervix) that is cancerous only in
its surface cells. 
insomnia Difficulty in falling asleep or
in staying asleep. About 1 in 3 adults
suffer from insomnia at some time in
their lives. The most common cause is
worry, but other causes include physical
symptoms such as a cough or itching or
conditions such as restless legs. Environ-
mental and lifestyle factors or misuse of
sleeping drugs are also common causes.
Insomnia can also be a symptom of a
psychiatric illness, such as anxiety and/
or  depression. Withdrawal symptoms
from  antidepressants,  antianxietydrugs,
sleeping drugs, and some illicit drugs
(see drug abuse), may cause insomnia. 
instinct An innate primitive urge. The
need for warmth, food, love, and sex are
all forms of instinct, but the instinct for
survival is probably the most powerful. 
institutionalization Loss of personal
independence that stems from living for
long periods under a rigid regime, such
as in a prison or other large institution.
Apathy, obeying orders unquestioningly,
accepting a standard routine, and loss
of interests are the main features. 
insulin A hormone produced by the pan-
creas that regulates glucose levels in the
blood. It is normally produced in re-
sponse to raised glucose levels following
a meal and promotes glucose absorption
into the liver and muscle cells (where it is
converted into energy). Insulin thus pre-
vents a build-up of glucose and ensures
that tissues have sufficient amounts of
glucose. Failure of insulin production
results in diabetes mellitus. An insulinoma
is a rare tumour that causes excessive
production of insulin and consequent
attacks of hypoglycaemia.
Insulin replacement, self-administered
by injection or through an infusion
pump (see pump, insulin), is used in the
treatment of diabetes mellitus. Insulin
cannot be taken orally because it is
destroyed by stomach  acid. Prepara-
tions are produced from pigor ox
pancreas or, more commonly, by genetic
engineering. This treatment prevents
excessively high glucose levels in blood
(hyperglycaemia) and  ketosis (a build-
up of certain acids in the blood), which,
in severe cases, may cause coma.
Too high a dose of insulin will cause
hypoglycaemia, which can be relieved by
consuming food or a sugary drink. Severe
hypoglycaemia may cause coma, for which
emergency treatment with an injection of
glucose or glucagon (a hormone that op-
poses the effects of insulin) is necessary.
insulinoma A rare noncancerous tumour
of the insulin-producing cells of the pan-
creas. Abnormal quantities of insulin are
produced with the result that the amount
of glucose in the blood can fall to dan-
gerously low levels (hypoglycaemia) and,
unless sugar is given immediately, can
cause coma and death. Once diagnosed, a
drug (diazoxide) is given to prevent hypo-
glycaemia until the tumour is removed.
intelligence The ability to understand
concepts and to reason them out. Intel-
ligence can also be considered as having
3 separate forms: abstract (understanding
INTELLIGENCE INSECURITY
I312
ideas and symbols); practical (aptitude
in dealing with practical problems such
as repairing machinery); and social (cop-
ingreasonably and wisely with human
relationships). Intelligence increases up
to the age of about 6 years and then
stabilizes. Intelligence quotient (IQ), as
measured by  intelligence tests, continues
to increase to about the age of 26, stays
the same until about theage of 40, and
then gradually declines. Intelligence is
partly inherited, although environment
also plays a major part, as does physi-
cal health and personality.
Extremes of intelligence occur in learn-
ing difficulties (defined by a low IQ) and in
the gifted (defined by scores over 140).
intelligence tests Tests designed to pro-
vide an estimate of a person＊s mental
abilities. The most widely used are Wech-
sler tests of which there are 2 basic
types: the Wechsler Adult Intelligence
Scale (WAIS) and the Wechsler Intelli-
gence Scale for Children (WISC). Each 
is divided into verbal (concerned with 
language skills) and performance 
sections, including measures of con-
structional ability and visual-spatial and
perceptual ability (interpretation of
shapes). Other tests include the Stan-
ford每Binet test, which is used mainly as a
measure of scholastic ability. 
In most intelligence tests, scoring is
based on mental age (MA) in relation to
chronological age (CA). The intelligence
quotient (IQ) is MA divided by CA, multi-
plied by 100. The tests are devised to
ensure that 3 in 4 people have an IQ bet-
ween 80 and 120. They are standardized
so that the score indicates the same rel-
ative ability at different age levels. 
Intelligence tests may be used to assess
school or job aptitude. However, they
have been criticized for their alleged
bias regarding gender and race.
intensive care Constant close moni-
toring and treatment of seriously ill
patients that enables treatment to be
tailored to the patient＊s condition on an
hour-by-hour basis. Intensive care units
INTELLIGENCE TESTS INTENSIVE CARE
I
Intravenous
fluids
ECGelectrodes
detect electrical
activity of heart
Monitor displays
blood pressure
and heart rate
measurements
Drug
therapy
Ventilator
Ventilator
tubing
Pulse
oximeter to
measure
blood oxygen
levels
Adjustable
height bed
Nurse
Nutrients
INTENSIVECARE
Suction
equipment to
clear airways
Oxygen
supply313
(ICUs), sometimes known as intensive
treatment units (ITUs), contain electronic
equipment to monitor vital functions
such as blood pressure and heart-rate
and rhythm. Frequently, patients in these
units require mechanical ventilation, in
which a machine takes over or assists
with breathing. Urine output, fluid bal-
ance, and blood chemistry are recorded
regularly. Fluids are given intravenously.
If nutrients are required, they are sup-
plied to the stomach through a tube.
There is a high ratio of specially trained
nursing and medical staff to patients.
(See also coronary care unit.)
inter- A prefix that means between, as
in  intercostal (between the ribs). (See
also intra-.) 
intercostal The medical term for between
the  ribs, as in the intercostal muscles,
thin sheets of muscle between each rib. 
intercourse, painful Pain during  sex-
ual intercourse, known medically as
dyspareunia, which can affect both men
and women. Pain may be superficial
(around the external genitals) or deep
(within the pelvis). 
In men, superficial pain may be due to
anatomical abnormalities such as chor-
dee (bowed erection) or phimosis (tight
foreskin).  Prostatitis may cause a wide-
spread pelvic ache, a burning sensation
in the penis, or pain on ejaculation.
Scarring (after childbirth, for example)
and lack of vaginal lubrication, especially
after the menopause, may cause painful
intercourse in women. Psychosexual dys-
function may also cause pain during
intercourse. Vaginismus, a condition in
which the muscles of the vagina go into
spasm, is usually psychological in ori-
gin. Deep pain is frequently caused by
pelvic disorders (such as fibroids, endo-
metriosis,  ectopic pregnancy, or  pelvic
inflammatory disease  due to sexually
transmitted infections), disorders of the
ovary (such as ovarian cysts), and disor-
ders of the  cervix. Other causes are
cystitis and urinary tract infections.
Treatment is directed at the underly-
ing cause of the pain. If the discomfort
is psychological in origin, special coun-
selling may be needed (see sex therapy).
interferon A protein produced natur-
ally by body cells in response to viral
infections and other stimuli. It inhibits
viral multiplication and increases the
activity of natural killer cells (a type of
lymphocyte that forms part of the body＊s
immune system). It is also produced
artificially for use in treatment of a
number of disorders. There are 3 main
types: interferon alfa is used in the
treatment of certain  lymphomas, a type
of  leukaemia, and chronic  hepatitis B
and  C. Interferon beta is used in the
treatment of relapsing multiple sclerosis.
Interferon gamma is used to reduce the
risk of  serious infections in some types
of  immunodeficiency. Adverse reactions
include fever, headaches, lethargy, de-
pression, and dizziness.
intermittent claudication A cramping
pain in the legs due to inadequate
blood supply (see claudication).
intersex A group of abnormalities in
which the affected person has ambigu-
ous genitalia (abnormal external sex
organs) or external genitalia that have
the opposite appearance to the chro-
mosomal sex of the individual (see sex
determination).
interstitial Referring to gaps (interstices)
between cells, tissues, or other body
structures. For example,  tissue fluid be-
tween body cells is known as interstitial
fluid. (See also interstitialradiotherapy.)
interstitial pulmonary fibrosis Scar-
ring of lung tissue mainly involving the
alveoli. There are a number of causes,
including occupational exposure to
dusts and  fibrosing alveolitis, which is
an autoimmune disorder. 
interstitial radiotherapy Treatment of
a cancerous tumour by inserting radio-
active material into the growth or into
neighbouring tissue. Using this method,
also called brachytherapy, radiation can
be targeted at the diseased area. 
Radioactive material (usually artificial
radioisotopes) contained in wires, small
tubes, or seeds is then implanted into
or near the diseased tissue under general
anaesthesia. The material is left in place
for variable amounts of time depending
on the radioactive substance and the
tumour being treated. (See also  intra-
cavitary therapy; radiotherapy.)
intertrigo Inflammation of the skin due
to2 surfaces rubbing together. Intertrigo
INTERTRIGO INTER-
I314
is most common in obese people. The
affected skin is red and moist and may
have an odour, often with a fungal infec-
tion such as candidiasis; there may also
be scales or blisters. The condition wors-
ens with sweating. Treatment consists of
weight reduction and keeping the affected
areas clean and dry. A cream containing
a corticosteroid and/or antifungal drug is
used if candidiasis is present.
intervertebral disc See disc, interver-
tebral.
intestinal imaging See  barium X-ray
examinations.
intestinal lipodystrophy See  Whip-
ple＊s disease.
intestine The major part of the digestive
tract (see  digestive system), extending
from the exit of the stomach to the anus.
It forms a long tube divided into 2 main
sections: the small and large intestines.
The small intestine is about 6.5 m in
length and has 3 sections: the  duode-
num, the jejunum and the ileum. Partially
digested food from the stomach is
forced along the intestine by peristalsis.
The small intestine is concerned with
the digestion and absorption of food.
Digestive enzymes and bile are added to
the partly digested food in the duodenum
via the bile and pancreatic ducts (see
biliary system). Glands within the walls of
each section of the small intestine pro-
duce mucus and other enzymes, which
help to break down the food. Blood
vessels in the intestinal walls absorb
nutrients and carry them to the liver for
distribution to the rest of the body.
The large intestine is about 1.5m long.
The main section, the  colon, is divided
into an ascending, a transverse, a
descending, and a pelvic portion (the
sigmoid colon). The appendix hangs from
a pouch (the caecum) between the small
intestine and the colon. The final sec-
tion before the anus is the rectum.
Unabsorbed material leaves the small
intestine as liquid and fibre. As this
material passes through the large intes-
tine, water, vitamins, and mineral salts are
absorbed into the bloodstream, leaving
faeces made up of undigested food resi-
due, fat, various secretions, and bacteria.
The faeces are compressed and pass
into the rectum for evacuation. 
intestine, cancer of A malignant tumour
in the intestine. Both the small and large
intestine may develop carcinoid tumours
(leading to  carcinoid syndrome) and
lymphomas. Cancer of the small intestine
is rare, but cancer of the large intestine is
one of the most common of all cancers
(see colon, cancer of; rectum, cancer of).
intestine, disorders of The intestine is
subject to various structural abnormali-
ties and to the effects of many infective
organisms and parasites; it may also be
affected by tumours and other disorders.
Structural abnormalities may be pre-
sent from birth (congenital) or may
develop later. They cause blockage of the
intestine (see intestine, blockage of) and
include atresia, stenosis, and volvulus. In
newborns, meconium (fetal intestinal
contents) may block the intestine. 
Generalized inflammation of the intes-
tine may result from viral or bacterial
infections or from noninfectious causes,
as in ulcerative colitis and Crohn＊s disease.
Gastroenteritis is the term commonly ap-
plied to inflammation of the stomach and
intestines. Infection encompasses  food
poisoning,  traveller＊s diarrhoea,  typhoid
fever, cholera, amoebiasis, and giardiasis.
Intestinal worm infestations include
roundworms and  tapeworms. Some-
times inflammation is localized, such as
in appendicitis and diverticular disease.
Tumours of the small intestine are rare,
but noncancerous growths, lymphomas,
and carcinoid tumours (causing carcinoid
syndrome) occur. Tumours of the large
intestine are common (see colon, cancer
of; rectum, cancer of). Some forms of
familial polyposis may progress to cancer.
Impaired blood supply (ischaemia) to
the intestine may occur as a result of
partial or complete obstruction of the
arteries in the abdominal wall (from dis-
eases such as  atherosclerosis) or from
the blood vessels being compressed or
trapped, as in  intussusception or hernias.
Loss of blood supply may cause gangrene.
Other disorders that affect the intestine
include peptic ulcers, diverticulosis, mal-
absorption,coeliac disease, and  irritable
bowel syndrome.
intestine, obstruction of A partial or
complete blockage of the small or large
intestine. Causes include a strangulated
INTERVERTEBRAL DISCINTESTINE, OBSTRUCTION OF
Imainly used to treat cancers of the
uterus and cervix (see uterus, cancer of;
cervix, cancer of). If implants (usually in
the form of artificial radioisotopes em-
bedded in wires or small tubes) are used,
they are left there for a period of time. 
The technique may be used to treat a
malignant effusion (a collection of fluid
that contains cancerous cells). A needle,
sometimes with a  catheter attached, is
passed through the wall of the abdomen
or the chest into the abdominal cavity or
pleural cavity (the space around the
lungs). As much of the fluid as possible
is withdrawn from the cavity before anti-
cancer drugs are injected directly into
it. (See also interstitial radiotherapy.)
intracerebral haemorrhage Bleed-
ing into the brain from a ruptured blood
vessel. It is 1 of the 3 principal mecha-
nisms by which a stroke can occur. It
mainly affects middle-aged or elderly
people and is usually due to atheroscle-
rosis. Untreated hypertension increases
the risk of intracerebral haemorrhage. 
The ruptured artery is usually in the
cerebrum. The escaped blood seeps out,
damaging brain tissue. The symptoms are
sudden headache, weakness, and con-
fusion, and often loss of consciousness.
Speech loss, facial paralysis, or one-
sided weakness may develop, depending
on the area affected. Surgery is usually
impossible; treatment is aimed at life-
support and the reduction of blood
pressure. Large haemorrhages are usually
fatal. For the survivor of an intracerebral
haemorrhage, rehabilitationand outlook
are as for any type of stroke.
INTRACAVITARY THERAPY
315
hernia; stenosis (narrowing) of the intes-
tine, often due to cancer in the intestine;
intestinal  atresia;  adhesions;  volvulus;
and  intussusception. Intestinal obstruc-
tion also occurs in diseases that affect
the intestinal wall, such as Crohn＊s dis-
ease. In less common cases, internal
blockage of the intestinal canal is caused
by impacted food, faecal impaction, gall-
stones, or an object that has been
accidentally swallowed.
A blockage in the small intestine usu-
ally causes intermittent cramp-like pain
in the centre of the abdomen with
increasingly frequent bouts of vomiting
and failure to pass wind or faeces. An
obstruction in the large intestine causes
pain, distension of the abdomen, and
failure to pass wind or faeces. 
Treatments involve emptying the stom-
ach via a nasogastrictube and replacing
lost fluids through an intravenous drip
In some cases, this will be sufficient to
correct the problem. However, in many
cases, surgery to deal with the cause of
the blockage is necessary. 
intestine, tumours of Cancerous or
noncancerous growths in the intestine.
Cancerous tumours commonly affect the
large intestine (see colon, cancer of; rec-
tum, cancer of); the small intestine is only
rarely affected. Lymphomas and carcinoid
tumours (leading to carcinoid syndrome)
may sometimes develop in the intestine;
noncancerous tumours include  polyps
in the colon, and  adenomas,  leiomy-
omas,  lipomas, and  angiomas in the
small intestine. 
intoxication A general term for a con-
dition resulting from  poisoning. It
customarily refers to the effects of exces-
sive drinking (see  alcohol intoxication),
but also includes  drug poisoning, poi-
soning from the accumulation of the
by-products of metabolism in the body,
or the effects of industrial poisons.
intra- A prefix that means within, as in
the term intramuscular (within a mus-
cle). (See also inter-.)
intracavitary therapy Treatment of a
cancerous tumour in a body cavity or
the cavity of a hollow organ by placing a
radioactive implant or anticancer drugs
within the cavity. Also called brachy-
therapy, intracavitary  radiotherapy is
INTRACEREBRAL HAEMORRHAGE INTESTINE, TUMOURS OF
I
Bladder
Rectum
Uterus
Vagina
INTRACAVITARY RADIOTHERAPY
Radioactive implantintracytoplasmic sperm injection
(ICSI) A treatment for male infertility in
which a single sperm is collected from a
sample of semen and used to fertilize an
ovum in vitro (see  in vitro fertilization).
The ovum is then placed in the uterus.
intractable A term to describe any condi-
tion that does not respond to treatment.
intradermal  A medical term meaning
into or within the upper layers of the
skin. An  intradermal injection is made
into the skin; whereas a  subcutaneous
injection is made under the skin.
intramuscular A medical term meaning
within a muscle, as in an intramuscular
injection, in which a drug is injected
deep within a muscle.
intraocular pressure The pressure with-
in the eye that helps to maintain the
shape of the eyeball, due to the balance
between the rate of production and
removal of aqueous  humour. Aqueous
humour is continually produced from
the  ciliary body and exits from the
drainage angle (a network of tissue be-
tween the iris and cornea). If drainage is
impeded, intraocular pressure builds up
(a condition known as glaucoma). If the
ciliary body is damaged (as a result of
prolonged inflammation),
less fluid is produced and
the eye becomes soft. 
intrauterine contracep-
tive device See IUD.
intrauterine growth re-
tardation Poor growth in
a fetus, usually resulting
from a failure of the pla-
centa to provide adequate
nutrients (often related to
pre-eclampsia) or some-
times from a fetal defect.
Severe maternal disease,
such as chronic kidney
failure, can reduce fetal
growth. Fetal problems
such as an intrauterine in-
fection or genetic disorder
can also impair growth.
Smoking during preg-
nancy may reduce fetal
growth and birth weight.
Intrauterine growth retar-
dation may be suspected
on antenatal examination;
ultrasound scanning may be performed
to assess the problem. The underlying
cause is treated, if possible. If the baby＊s
growth is slowing, induction of labour or
a  caesarean section may be  necessary.
Most babies whose growth was retarded
in the uterus gain weight  rapidly after
delivery. However, if an intrauterine infec-
tion or genetic disorder was the cause,
poor growth may continue.
intravenous A term meaning within a
vein, as in intravenous infusion (slow
introduction of a substance into a vein)
and intravenous injection (rapid intro-
duction of a substance into a vein).
intravenous infusion The slow intro-
duction, over hours or days, of fluid into
the bloodstream through a cannula (thin
plastic tube) inserted into a vein. Com-
monly known as a drip, an intravenous
injection is used to give blood (see blood
transfusion) or, more commonly, fluids
and essential salts. Other uses include
providing nutrients to people unable to
digest food (see  feeding, artificial) and
the administration of certain drugs. 
intravenous urography An X-ray pro-
cedure, commonly abbreviated to IVU,
used to give a clear image of the urinary
INTRAVENOUS UROGRAPHY
316
INTRACYTOPLASMIC SPERM INJECTIONINTRAVENOUS UROGRAPHY
I
Adjustable
arm
Beam of
X-rays
Drawer
containing
X-ray film
X-ray source
Site of
injection
X-ray
table
Control
paneltract. The procedure involves intravenous
infusion of a  contrast medium into the
arm. The medium is carried in the blood
to the urinary system, whereit  passes
through the kidneys, ureters, and bladder
to be excreted in the urine. X-rays taken
at intervals show outlines of the urinary
system. IVU detects abnormalities such
as tumours and obstructions, and signs
of kidney disease.
intrinsic factor A chemical produced
by the stomach lining that is necessary
for the absorption of vitamin B12.
introitus A general term for the en-
trance to a body cavity or space, most
commonly used for the vagina.
introvert A person more concerned
with his or her inner world. Introverts
prefer to work alone, are shy, quiet, and
withdrawn when under stress. (See also
extrovert; personality.)
intubation Most commonly, the pro-
cess of passing an  endotracheal tube
(breathing tube) into the trachea (wind-
pipe). Endotracheal intubation is carried
out if mechanical  ventilation is needed
to deliver oxygen to the lungs. The tube
is passed through the mouth or nose
and down the throat. 
The term intubation is also used to
refer to the placement of a gastric or
intestinal tube in the stomach for pur-
poses of suction or the giving of nutrients
(see feeding, artificial). 
intussusception A condition in which
part of the intestine telescopes in on
itself, forming a tube within a tube, usu-
ally resulting in intestinal obstruction
(see intestine, obstruction of). The condi-
tion usually affects the last part of the
small intestine, where it joins the large
intestine. In some cases there is an
association with a recent infection. In
other cases, it may start at the site of a
polyp or Meckel＊s diverticulum. 
Intussusception occurs most common-
lyin children under the age of 2. An
affected child usually develops severe
abdominal colic; vomiting is common,
and blood and mucus are often found
in the faeces. In severe cases, the blood
supply to the intestine becomes blocked
and gangrene, followed by peritonitis or
perforation, may result. In some cases,
an  enema can be used to force the
317
abnormal area of bowel back into a nor-
mal position. In other cases, surgery may
be necessary to reposition the bowel.
invasive Tending to spread throughout
body tissues; the term is usually ap-
plied to cancerous tumours or harmful
microorganisms. In an invasive medical
procedure, body tissues are penetrated
by an instrument. (See also  minimally
invasive surgery and noninvasive.) 
inverted nipple An indrawing of the
nipple, which can be longstanding or
may develop in later life as a result of
changes in the breast. Causes include
normal changes associated with aging
or, in some cases, an underlying cancer.
in vitro The performance of biological
processes in a laboratory rather than
within thebody. The term in vitro liter-
ally means ※in glass§. 
in vitro fertilization A method of treat-
ing  infertility in which an egg (ovum) is
surgically removed from the ovary and
fertilized outside the body. 
The woman is given a course of fertility
drugs to stimulate release of eggs from
the ovary. This is followed by ultrasound
scanning to check the eggs, which are
collected by  laparoscopy immediately
before ovulation. They are then mixed
with sperm in the laboratory. Two, or
sometimes more, fertilized eggs are
replaced into the uterus. If they become
safely implanted in the uterine wall, the
pregnancy usually continues normally.
Only about 1 in 10 couples undergoing
in vitro fertilization achieves pregnancy
at the 1st attempt, and many attempts
IN VITRO FERTILIZATION INTRINSIC FACTOR
I
Intussuscepted
segment
Large
intestine
LOCATION
Appendix
Small
intestine
INTUSSUSCEPTIONanions in the extracellular fluid and
blood, and by phosphate anions inside
cells (see acid每base balance).
ionizer A device that produces  ions
(electrically charged particles). Ionizers
that produce negative ions can be used
to neutralize positive ions in the 
atmosphere. Some people believe that
use of an ionizer reduces symptoms,
such as headaches and fatigue, that
may result from a build-up of positive
ions generated by electrical machines. 
ipecacuanha A drug (also called ipecac)
used to induce vomiting in the treatment
of types of poisoning.
ipratropium bromide A bronchodilator
drug used to treat breathing difficulties.
IQ The abbreviation for intelligence
quotient, an age-related measure of
intelligence (see intelligence tests).
iridectomy A procedure performed on
the eye to remove part of the  iris. The
most common type of iridectomy, known
as a ※peripheral iridectomy§, is usually
performed to treat acute  glaucoma. A
small opening is made, surgically or
with a laser, near the outer edge of the
iris to form a channel through which
aqueous humour can drain.
iridocyclitis Inflammation of the  iris
and  ciliary body. Iridocyclitis is more
usually known as ※anterior uveitis§. (See
also eye, disorders of.)
iridotomy A surgical procedure per-
formed on the eye, in which an incision
is made in the  iris using a knife or a
laser. (See also iridectomy.)
iris The coloured part of the eye, made
up of a loose framework of transparent
collagen and muscle fibres, that lies
behind the cornea and in front of the
may be needed before a successful
pregnancy is achieved. Modifications of
the technique, such as gamete intrafal-
lopian transfer (GIFT), are simpler and
cheaper than the original method.
in vivo Biological processes occurring
within the body. (See also in vitro.)
involuntary movements Uncontrolled
movements of the body. These move-
ments occur spontaneously and may be
slow and writhing (see athetosis); rapid,
jerky, and random (see chorea); or pre-
dictable, stereotyped, and affecting 1
part of the body, usually the face (see
tic). They may be a feature of a disease
(for example, Huntington＊s disease) or a
side effect of certain drugs used to treat
psychiatric conditions. 
iodine An element essential for forma-
tion of the thyroid hormones, triiodothy-
ronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4), which
control the rate of metabolism (internal
chemistry) and growth and development.
Dietary shortage may lead to goitre or
hypothyroidism. Deficiency in the new-
born can, if left untreated, lead to
cretinism. Shortages are very rare in deve-
loped countries due to bread and table
salt being fortified with iodide or iodate.
Radioactive iodine is sometimes used
to reduce thyroid gland activity in cases
of thyrotoxicosis and in the treatment of
thyroid cancer. Iodine compounds are
used as antiseptics, in radiopaque con-
trast media in some X-ray procedures
(see  imaging techniques), and in some
cough remedies. 
ion A particle that carries an electrical
charge; positive ions are called cations
and negative ions are called anions.
Many vital body processes, such as the
transmission of nerve impulses, depend
on the movement of ions across cell
membranes. Sodium is the principal
cation in the fluid that bathes all cells
(extracellular fluid). It affects the flow of
water into and out of cells (see osmosis),
thereby influencing the concentration
of body fluids.
The acidity of blood and other body
fluids depends on the level of hydrogen
cations, which are produced by meta-
bolic processes. To prevent the fluids
from becoming too acidic, hydrogen
cations are neutralized by bicarbonate
IN VIVO IRIS
I
Iris Pupil
IRIS
318lens. It is connected at its outer edge to
the ciliary body and has a central aper-
ture, the  pupil, through which light
enters the eye and falls on the retina.
The iris constantly contracts and dilates
to alter the size of the pupil, which con-
trols the amount of light that passes
through the pupil. 
iritis An inflammation of the  iris, now
often termed an ※anterior uveitis§.
iron A mineral essential for the forma-
tion of certain  enzymes,  haemoglobin
(the oxygen-carrying pigment in red
blood cells), and  myoglobin (the oxy-
gen-carrying pigment in muscle cells). It
is found in foods such as liver, cereals,
fish, green leafy vegetables, nuts, and
beans. During pregnancy, supplements
may be needed. Iron deficiency leading
to anaemia (see anaemia, iron deficiency)
is usually caused by abnormal blood
loss, such as from a peptic ulcer or heavy
periods, but may also be due to diet. 
Iron supplements may cause nausea,
abdominal pain, constipation, or diar-
rhoea and may colour the faeces black.
Excessive iron in the tissues is a feature
of  haemochromatosis, which results in
organ damage, commonly cirrhosis.
iron-deficiency anaemia See anaemia,
iron-deficiency.
iron lung A large machine formerly used
to maintain breathing, especially in
people paralysed by  poliomyelitis. The
iron lung has been replaced by more
efficient means of maintaining breath-
ing (see ventilation). 
irradiation See  radiation hazards;  radio-
therapy.
irradiation of food The treatment of
food with ionizing radiation to kill bacte-
ria, moulds, insects, and other parasites.
It improves the keeping qualities of
food and is a means of controlling some
types of  food poisoning. It does not
destroy bacterial toxins, however, and
may destroy  vitamins. Irradiation does
not render food radioactive. 
irrigation, wound Cleansing of a deep
wound by repeatedly washing it out with
a medicated solution or sterile saline. 
irritable bladder Intermittent, uncon-
trolled contractions of the muscles in the
bladder wall that may cause urge incon-
tinence (see incontinence, urinary). It can
319
occur temporarily if there is a urinary
tract infection (see  cystitis); a catheter
present within the bladder; a bladder
stone (see calculus, urinary tract); or an
obstruction to the outflow of urine by
an enlarged  prostate gland. In some
cases, symptoms may be relieved by
antispasmodic drugs; other treatment is
directed at any underlying cause. Blad-
der training may also be used.
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) A
combination of intermittent abdominal
pain and constipation, diarrhoea, or
bouts of each, that occurs in the absence
of other diagnosed disease. IBSaffects
about 10每20 per cent of adults; it is twice
as common in women as in men, usually
beginning in early or middle adulthood.
It is usually recurrent throughout life
but is unlikely to lead to complications. 
Symptoms include intermittent cramp-
like pain in the abdomen, abdominal
distension, often on the left side, tran-
sient relief of pain by bowel movement
or passing wind, sense of incomplete
evacuation of the bowels, and excessive
wind. Anxiety and stress tend to exacer-
bate the condition. 
If constipation is the main problem, a
high-fibre diet or bulk-forming agents,
such as bran or methylcellulose, may be
helpful. Short courses of  antidiarrhoeal
drugs may be given for persistent diar-
rhoea.  Antispasmodic drugs may be
prescribed to relieve muscular spasm.
Hypnosis, psychotherapy, and counselling
have proved effective in some cases.
ischaemia Insufficient blood supply to
a specific organ or tissue. It is usually
caused by disease of the blood vessels,
such as  atherosclerosis, but may also
result from injury, constriction of a ves-
sel due to spasm of the muscles in the
vessel wall, or inadequate blood flow
due to inefficient pumping of the heart.
Symptoms depend on the area affected.
Treatment may include  vasodilator
drugs to widen the blood vessels or,
in more severe cases, an  angioplasty
or bypass operation.
ischium One of the bones that form the
lower part of the pelvis.
isolation Nursing procedures (also called
barrier nursing) designed to prevent a
patient from infecting others or from
ISOLATION IRITIS
I320
being infected. The patient is usually
isolated in a single room.
Complete isolation is used if a patient
has a contagious disease, such as Lassa
fever, that can be transmitted to others
by direct contact and airborne germs. In
this case, all bedding, equipment and
clothing are either sterilized or inciner-
ated after use. Partial isolation is
carried out if the disease is transmitted
in a more limited way (by droplet spread,
as in tuberculosis, for example).
Reverse isolation, also called reverse
barrier nursing, is used to protect a
patient whose resistance to infection is
severely lowered by a disease or treat-
ment such as  chemotherapy. The air
supply to the room is filtered. All staff
and visitors wear caps, gowns, masks,
and gloves. Occasionally, long-term re-
verseisolation is needed for patients
with severe combined immunodeficiency
(see immunodeficiency disorders).
isometric A system of  exercise without
body movement in which muscles build
up strength by working against resis-
tance, provided by either a fixed object
or an opposing set of muscles. (See
also isotonic.)
isoniazid An  antibacterial drug used to
treat  tuberculosis. Isoniazid is given in
combination with other antituberculous
drugs, usually for at least 6 months. 
isoprenaline A drug that is used as a
bronchodilator, to dilate the air passages
in the lungs in conditions such as asth-
ma, and as a vasodilator to stimulate the
heart in conditions such as heart block.
Side effects include dry mouth, dizziness,
headache, palpitations, and chest pain.
isosorbide A long-acting  nitrate drug
that acts as a vasodilator drug. Isosor-
bide is used to reduce the severity and
frequency of  angina pectoris. This drug
is also given to treat severe heart failure.
Adverse effects include headache, hot
flushes, and dizziness.
isotonic A system of  exercise, such as
weight lifting, in which muscle tension is
kept constant as the body works against
its own, or an external, weight. The term
also describes fluids, such as intravenous
fluids or drinks, with the same osmotic
pressure (see  osmosis) as the blood.
(See also isometric.)
isotope scanning See radionuclide scan-
ning.
isotretinoin A drug derived from  vita-
min A used in the treatment of severe
acne. It works by reducing the formation
of sebum (natural skin oils) and keratin
(a tough protein that is the major com-
ponent of the outer layer of skin).
Side effects include itching, dryness
and flaking of the skin, and cracking of
the lips. Isotretinoin may damage a
developing fetus; pregnancy must be
avoided during treatment and for at
least 3 months after taking the drug.
Regular blood tests are recommended
to check for complications.
ispaghula A bulk-forming  laxativedrug
used to treat  constipation,  diverticular
disease, and  irritable bowel syndrome.
As ispaghula travels through the intes-
tine, it absorbs water from surrounding
blood vessels, thereby softening and
increasing the volume of the faeces.
Ispaghula is also used in people with
chronic, watery diarrhoea and in patients
who have had a colostomy or an ileosto-
my to control the consistency of faeces. 
Adverse effects include flatulence,
abdominal distension, and discomfort.
itching An intense irritation or tickling
sensation in the skin. Generalized itch-
ing may result from excessive bathing,
which removes the skin＊s natural oils
and may leave the skin excessively dry.
Some people experience general itching
after taking certain drugs. Many elderly
people suffer from dry, itchy skin, espe-
cially on their backs. Itching commonly
occurs during pregnancy.
Many skin conditions, including chick-
enpox, urticaria (nettle rash), and eczema,
produce an itchy rash. Generalized skin
itchiness can be a result of  diabetes
mellitus,  kidney failure,  jaundice, and
thyroid disorders.
Pruritus ani (itching around the anal
region) occurs with  haemorrhoids and
anal fissure.  Threadworm infestation is
the most likely cause of anal itching in
children. Pruritus vulvae (itching of the
external genitalia in women) may be due
to candidiasis, hormonal changes, or to
use of spermicides or vaginal ointments
and deodorants. Insect bites, lice, and sca-
bies infestations cause intense itching.
ISOMETRIC ITCHING
IWomen who have been pregnant are
less likely to have complications than
women who have never been pregnant.
For example, they may experience less
pain on insertion and have lighter men-
strual flow and lower expulsion rates.
IUDs are usually not recommended for
women with fibroids or an irregular uter-
ine cavity. If menstrual flow is heavy,or
there is a history or increased risk of
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), a pro-
gestogen IUD may be recommended. 
Rarely, pregnancy can occur, although
IUDs seldom cause problems and can be
removed. Nonprogestogen IUDs increase
the risk of PID, which can lead to per-
manent infertility. A rare complication
of IUD use is perforation of the  uterus,
which most commonly occurs at the
time of insertion. 
IVF See in vitro fertilization.
IVU The abbreviation for  intravenous
urography (an X-ray imaging technique
for visualizing the urinary tract).
Specific treatment for itching depends on
the underlying cause. Cooling lotions,
such as calamine, relieve irritation; emol-
lients reduce dryness. 
-itis A suffix meaning ※inflammation of§.
Virtually every organ or tissue in the body
can suffer inflammation, so ※itis§ is by
far the most common word ending in
medicine. Examples of its use are bron-
chitis (inflammation of the bronchi) and
hepatitis (inflammation of the liver). 
itraconazole A type of antifungal drug.
IUCD An abbreviation for intrauterine
contraceptive device (see IUD).
IUD An abbreviation for intrauterine con-
traceptive device. An IUD, which is also
known as an IUCD or coil, is a mechani-
cal device that is inserted into the
uterus for purposes of  contraception.
Most IUDs are plastic devices with
either copper or silver incorporated to
improve their effectiveness. One type 
of IUD releases small amounts of the
progestogen hormone levonorgestrel
and is sometimes known as an intra-
uterine system (IUS). IUDs are believed
to inhibit the implantation of a fertil-
ized egg in the wall of the uterus (see
implantation, egg).
An IUD is inserted through the vagina
and cervix into the uterine cavity. Once
in position, an IUD provides immediate
protection. Most IUDs have a plastic
string attached to make removal easier
and also to indicate its presence when
in place. IUDs usually need to be re-
placed every 3每8 years. 
321
IVU -ITIS
I
IUD
Vagina
IUD INPOSITION
Fallopian
tube
Uterus
IUD in
uterine
cavity 
Cervix
IUD
Plastic rod
Copper
wire coating
Thread322
Jakob每Creutzfeldt disease See Creutz-
feldt每Jakob disease.
jaundice Yellowing of the skin and the
whites of the eyes, caused by an accu-
mulation of  bilirubin in the blood.
Jaundice is the chief sign of many disor-
ders of the  liver and  biliary system.
Many babies develop jaundice soon
after birth (see jaundice, neonatal). 
Bilirubin is formed from haemoglobin
when old red cells are broken down,
mainly by the  spleen. It is absorbed by
the liver, where it is made soluble in
water and excreted in bile.
There are 3 main types of jaundice:
haemolytic, hepatocellular, and obstruc-
tive. In haemolytic jaundice, too much
bilirubin is produced for the liver to
process. This is caused by excessive
haemolysis of red cells, which can have
many causes (see anaemia, haemolytic).
In hepatocellular jaundice, bilirubin
accumulates because its transfer from
liver cells into the bile is prevented,
usually due to acute hepatitis (see hep-
atitis, acute) or liver failure.
In obstructive jaundice, also known as
cholestatic jaundice, bile cannot leave
the liver because of  bile duct obstruc-
tion. Obstructive jaundice can also
occur if the bile ducts are not present
(as in biliary atresia) or if they have been
destroyed by disease.  Cholestasis then
occurs and bilirubin is forced back into
the blood. For all types of jaundice,
treatment is for the underlying cause.
jaundice, neonatal Yellowing of the
skin and whites of the eyes in newborn
babies, due to accumulation of bilirubin
in the blood. It usually results from the
liver being immature  and unable to
excrete bilirubin efficiently. This form of
jaundice is usually harmless and disap-
pears within a week. Rarely, severe or
persistent neonatal  jaundice is caused
by  haemolytic diseaseof  the  newborn,
G6PD deficiency, hepatitis, hypothyroid-
ism, biliary atresia,or infection.
Jaundiced babies usually require extra
fluids and may be treated with  photo-
therapy. Exchange transfusion (see blood
transfusion) may be needed in severe
cases. If severe neonatal jaundice is not
treated promptly, kernicterus may occur.
jaw The mobile bone of the face, also
known as the mandible. The term some-
times includes the maxilla. The mandible
bears the lower teeth on its upper sur-
face and is connected to the base of the
skull at the  temporomandibularjoints.
Muscles attached to the jaw allow move-
ments needed in chewing, biting, and
side-to-side and downward movement.
jaw, dislocated Displacement of the
lower  jaw from one or both  temporo-
mandibularjoints. A dislocated jaw is
usually due either to a blow or to yawn-
ing. There is pain in front of the ear on
the affected side or sides, and the jaw
projects forwards. The mouth cannot be
fully closed, making eating and speak-
ing difficult. Dislocation tends to recur.
Surgery may be carried out to stabilize
the joint but is often unsuccessful.
jaw, fractured A fracture of the  jaw,
most often caused by a direct blow. A
minor fracture may cause tenderness,
pain on biting, and stiffness. In more
severe injuries, teeth may be loosened
or damaged, jaw movement may be sev-
erely limited, and there may be loss of
feeling in the lower lip. Minor fractures
are normally left to heal on their own.
For severe fractures with displacement
of the bones, surgical treatment is nec-
essary. To allow healing, the jaw is
immobilized, usually by wiring the upper
JAKOB每CREUTZFELDT DISEASEJAW, FRACTURED
J
JAW
Maxilla
(upper
jaw)
Tooth
Temporo-
mandibular
(TM) joint
Skull
Mandible (lower jaw)
J323
and lower teeth together. The wires are
removed after about 6 weeks.
jealousy, morbid Preoccupation with
the potential sexual infidelity of one＊s
partner. The sufferer, most often a man,
becomes convinced that his partner is
having an affair. Morbid jealousy is usu-
ally caused by a  personalitydisorder,
depression, or  paranoia, but may also
occur in those suffering from alcohol dep-
endence or organic brain syndrome (see
brain syndrome, organic).
jejunal biopsy A diagnostic test in which
a small piece of tissue is removed from
the lining of the jejunum for microscopic
examination. It is especially useful in the
diagnosis of Crohn＊s disease, coeliac dis-
ease,  lymphoma, and other causes of
malabsorption. The biopsy is taken using
an  endoscope passed down the throat
into the small intestine, via the stomach.
jejunum The middle, coiled section of
the small intestine, joining the duodenum
to the  ileum. The jejunum＊s function is
the digestion of food and absorption of
nutrients. It may be affected by  coeliac
disease, Crohn＊s disease, and lymphoma.
jellyfish stings Stings from jellyfish,
which belong to a group of marine ani-
mals called coelenterates or cnidarians.
Stinging capsules discharge when jelly-
fish tentacles are touched. Usually, the
sting causes only a mildly painful or itchy
rash, but some jellyfish and Portuguese
men-of-war (other members of the same
group) can cause a severe sting.Rarely,
venom may cause vomiting, sweating,
breathing difficulties, and collapse. Dan-
gerous species live mainly in tropical
waters. Antivenoms may be available.
jet-lag Fatigue and interruption of the
sleep每wake cycle caused by disturbance
of normal body biorhythms as a result of
flying across different time zones. Jet-lag
provokes daytime sleepiness and insom-
nia at night. Other symptoms include
reduced physical and mental activity,
and poor memory. Jet-lag tends to be
worse after an eastward flight (which
shortens the traveller＊s day) than after a
westward one. Treatment with the pitu-
itary hormone melatonin is claimed by
some to reduce the severity of jet-lag.
jigger An alternative name for a chigoe
or sand flea.
jogger＊s nipple Soreness of the nipple
caused by clothing rubbing against it,
usually during sports such as jogging or
long-distance running. Both men and
women can be affected. Prevention is by
applying petroleum jelly to the nipple
before prolonged running. 
joint The junction between 2 or more
bones. Many joints are highly mobile,
while others are fixed or allow only a
small amount of movement. 
Joints in the skull are fixed joints firmly
secured by fibrous tissue. The bone sur-
faces of mobile joints are coated with
smooth cartilage to reduce friction. The
joint is sealed within a tough fibrous
capsule lined with synovial membrane
(see synovium), which produces a lubri-
cating fluid. Each joint is surrounded by
strong  ligaments that support it and
prevent excessive movement. Movement
is controlled by muscles that are at-
tached to bone by  tendons on either
JOINT JEALOUSY, MORBID
J
JOINT
BALL AND
SOCKET JOINT
ELLIPSOIDAL
JOINT
HINGE JOINT
SADDLE
JOINT
PIVOT JOINT
Pivot joint 
(upper neck)
Fixed joint
(skull)
Saddle joint
(base of
thumb)
Ball and socket joint
(shoulder joint)
Ellipsoidal joint
(wrist joint)
Hinge joint
(knee joint)324
side of the joint. Most mobile joints have
at least one bursa nearby, which cush-
ions a pressure point.
There are several types of mobile
joint. The hinge joint is the simplest,
allowing bending and straightening, as
in the fingers. The knee and elbow joints
are modified hinge joints that allow
some rotation as well. Pivot joints, such
as the joint between the 1st and 2nd
vertebrae (see vertebra), allow rotation
only. Ellipsoidal joints, such as the wrist,
allow all types of movement except piv-
otal. Ball-and-socket joints include the
hip and shoulder joints. These allow the
widest range of movement (backwards
or forwards, sideways, and rotation).
Common joint injuries include sprains,
damage to the cartilage, torn ligaments,
and tearing of the joint capsule. Joint
dislocation is usually caused by injury
but is occasionally  congenital. A less
severe injury may cause  subluxation
(partial dislocation). Rarely, the bone
ends are fractured, which may cause
bleeding into the joint (haemarthrosis)
or effusion (build-up of fluid in a joint)
due to  synovitis (inflammation of the
joint lining). Joints are commonly affec-
ted by arthritis. Bursitis may occur as a
result of local irritation or strain. 
joint replacement See arthroplasty.
joule The international unit of  energy,
work, and heat. Approximately 4,200
joules (symbol J) or 4.2 kilojoules (kJ)
equal 1 kilocalorie (kcal); 1 kJ is equal to
about 0.24 kcal. (See also calorie.)
jugular vein One of 3 veins on each
side of the neck that return deoxygen-
ated blood from the head to the heart.
The internal jugular, the largest of the 3
(internal, external, and anterior), arises
at the base of the skull, travels down
the neck alongside the carotid arteries,
and passes behind the clavicle, where it
joins the subclavian vein (the large vein
that drains blood from the arms).
Jungian theory Ideas put forward by
the Swiss psychiatrist Carl Gustav Jung
(1875每1961). Jung theorized that certain
ideas (called archetypes) inherited from
experiences in a person＊s distant past
were present in his or her unconscious
and controlled the way he or she viewed
the world. Jung called these shared
ideas the ※collective unconscious§. He
believed that each individual also had a
※personal unconscious§, containing ex-
periences from his or her life, but he
regarded the collective unconscious as
superior. Therapy was aimed at putting
people in touch with this source of
ideas, particularly through dream inter-
pretation. Jung＊s approach was also
based on his theory of personality,
which postulated 2 basic types: the
extrovert and the introvert. One of these
types dominates a person＊s conscious-
ness and the other must be brought
into consciousness and reconciled with
its opposite for the person to become a
whole individual. 
juvenile arthritis See  juvenile chronic
arthritis.
juvenile chronic arthritis A rare form
of  arthritis affecting children. Juvenile
chronic arthritis occurs more often in
girls, and usually develops between 2
and 4 years of age or around puberty.
There are 3 main types.  Still＊s disease
(systemic onset juvenile arthritis) starts
with fever, rash, enlarged lymph nodes,
abdominal pain, and weight loss. These
symptoms last for a period of several
weeks. Joint pain, swelling, and stiffness
may develop after several months. Poly-
articular juvenile arthritis causes pain,
swelling, and stiffness in many joints.
Pauciarticular juvenile arthritis affects 4
joints or fewer.
Possible complications include short
stature,  anaemia,  pleurisy,  pericarditis,
and enlargement of the liver and spleen.
Uveitis may develop, which, if untreated,
may damage vision. Rarely, amyloidosis
may occur or kidney failure may develop.
Diagnosis is based on the symptoms,
together with the results of X-rays and
blood tests, and is only made if the con-
dition lasts for longer than 3 months.
Treatment may include  antirheumatic
drugs, corticosteroid drugs, nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs,  or  aspirin.
Splints may be worn to rest inflamed
joints and to reduce the risk of deformi-
ties.  Physiotherapy reduces the risk of
muscle wasting and deformities.
The arthritis usually clears up after sev-
eral years. However, in some children, the
condition remains active into adult life.
JOINT REPLACEMENTJUVENILE CHRONIC ARTHRITIS
J325
kala-azar  A form of  leishmaniasis that 
is spread by insects. Kala-azar occurs 
in parts of Africa, India, the Mediter-
ranean, and South America.
kaolin An  aluminium compound used 
as an ingredient in some antidiarrhoeal
drugs. Kaolin is taken orally and in-
creases the bulk of faeces. It is also
believed to adsorb bacteria, viruses,and
toxins  in the intestine, transporting
them through the digestive tract for
excretion in the faeces. 
Kaposi＊s sarcoma A cancerous tumour
arising from blood vessels, usually in
the skin. Kaposi＊s sarcoma usually only
occurs in those people who have AIDS.
The tumours, which consist of pinkish-
brown raised areas or flat patches, can
spread rapidly. They usually start on the
feet and ankles, spread up the legs, and
then appear on the hands and arms.
Tumours can also affect the gastroin-
testinal and respiratory tracts, where they
may cause severe internal bleeding. Skin
lesions may be treated with radiotherapy.
Anticancer drugs may be used for wide-
spread skin disease or internal lesions.
karyotype The characteristics of  chro-
mosomes, in terms of number, size, and
structure, in an individual or a species.
The term ※karyotype§ is also applied to a
diagramof chromosome pairs arranged
in their assigned numerical order.
Kawasaki disease A rare acute illness
of unknown cause that most commonly
affects children under 2. The disease is
characterized by fever lasting 1每2 weeks,
conjunctivitis, dryness and cracking of
the lips, swollen lymph nodes in the neck,
reddening of the palms and soles, and a
generalized rash. By the end of the 2nd
week of illness, the skin at the tips of
the fingers and toes peels and other
symptoms subside. The heart muscle
and  coronary arteries are affected in
about 1 in 5 cases. High dose gamma-
globulin and  aspirin may be given to
prevent associated heart complications.
Most children recover completely.
keloid A raised, hard, irregularly shaped,
itchy scar on the skin due to a defective
healing process in which too much colla-
gen is produced, usually after a skin
injury. Keloids can develop anywhere on
the body, but the breastbone and shoul-
der are common sites. Black people are
affected more than whites. After several
months, most keloids flatten and cease
to itch. Injection of corticosteroid drugs
into the keloid may  reduce itchiness
more quickly and cause some shrinkage.
keratin A fibrous  protein that is the
main constituent of the tough outer-
most layer of the skin, nails,and hair.
keratitis Inflammation of the  cornea.  It
often takes the form of a  corneal ulcer
and may result from injury, contact with
chemicals, or an infection. Symptoms of
keratitis include pain and excessive
watering of the eye, blurring of vision,
and photophobia. Noninfective keratitis
is treated by covering the affected eye.
Drugs such as  antibiotics may be given
to treat infective keratitis.
keratoacanthoma A type of harmless
skin nodule that commonly occurs in
elderly people, most often on the face
or arm. The cause is unknown, but many
years of exposure to strong sunlight or
long-term use of  immunosuppressant
drugs may be factors. Initially, the nod-
ule resembles a small wart, but it grows
to 1每2cm across in about 8 weeks.
Although the nodule usually disappears
gradually after this, surgical removal is
often recommended to prevent scarring. 
KERATOACANTHOMA KALA每AZAR
K
KAPOSI＊S SARCOMA
K
Raised sarcoma Flat sarcoma326
keratoconjunctivitis Inflammation of
the cornea associated with conjunctivitis.
The most common form, epidemic kera-
toconjunctivitis, is caused by a virus and
is highly infectious. The conjunctivitis is
often severe and may destroy the surface
ofthe  conjunctiva.  Tiny opaque spots
develop in the cornea that may interfere
with vision and persist for months. There
is no specific treatment, but corneal
spots may be minimized by using eye-
drops containing corticosteroid drugs.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca Persistent
dryness of the  cornea and  conjunctiva
caused by deficiency in tear production.
The condition is associated with  auto-
immune disorders such as  rheumatoid
arthritis, Sj?gren＊s syndrome, and  sys-
temiclupus erythematosus. Prolonged
dryness may lead to blurred vision, itch-
ing, grittiness, and, in severe cases, the
formation of a  corneal ulcer.  The most
effective treatment is frequent use of
artificial tears (see tears, artificial).
keratoconus An inherited disorder of
the eye in which the  cornea becomes
gradually thinned and conical. The con-
dition affects both eyes and usually
develops around puberty, giving rise to
increasing myopia and progressive dis-
tortion of vision that cannot be fully
corrected by glasses. Hard contact len-
ses improve vision in the early stages,
but when vision has seriously deterio-
rated and contact lenses are no longer
helpful it generally becomes necessary
to perform a corneal graft. 
keratolytic drugs Drugs that loosen
and remove the tough outer layer of
skin. Keratolytic drugs, which include urea
and salicylic acid preparations, are used to
treat skin and scalp disorders, such as
warts, acne, dandruff,and psoriasis.
keratomalacia A progressive disease of
the eye, caused by severe vitamin A de-
ficiency, in which the  cornea becomes
opaque and ulcerated. Perforation of
the cornea is common, often leading to
loss of the eye through infection. The
condition usually occurs only in sev-
erely malnourished children and is a
common cause of blindness in develop-
ing countries. In the early stages, the
damage can be reversed by treatment
with large doses of vitamin A but, if un-
treated, blindness is usually inevitable.
keratopathy A general term used to
describe a variety of disorders of the
cornea. Actinic keratopathy is a painful
condition in which the outer layer of the
cornea is damaged by  ultraviolet light.
Exposure keratopathy is corneal dam-
age due to loss of the protection
afforded by the tear film and blink
reflex. It may occur in conditions in
which the eyelids inadequately cover
the cornea, including severe exophthal-
mos, facial palsy, and ectropion.
keratoplasty See corneal graft.
keratosis A  skin growth caused by an
overproduction of  keratin. Keratoses
occur mainly in elderly people. Sebor-
rhoeic keratoses are harmless growths
that occur mainly on the trunk. The
growths range in appearance from flat,
dark-brown patches to small, wart-like
protrusions. They do not need treating
unless they are unsightly. Solar kera-
toses are small, wart-like, red or
flesh-coloured growths that appear on
exposed parts of the body as a result of
overexposure to the sun over many
years. Rarely, they may develop into skin
cancer, usually  squamous cell carcino-
ma, and must be surgically removed.
keratosis pilaris A common condition
in which patches of rough skin appear
on the upper arms, thighs, and but-
tocks. The openings of the hair follicles
become enlarged by plugs of  keratin,
and hair growth may be distorted. The
condition occurs most commonly in
KERATOCONJUNCTIVITISKERATOSIS PILARIS
K
Thin, conical
cornea
Normal
cornea
Lens
KERATOCONUS
NORMAL EYE KERATOCONUSbody. Ketones are normal products of
fat metabolism but are produced in ex-
cess when glucose is not available for the
body to use as an energy source, for
example in starvation or inadequately
controlled  diabetes mellitus. Symptoms
include sweet, ※fruity§-smelling breath,
loss of appetite, nausea, and abdominal
pain. If the condition is not treated, it
may result in confusion, unconscious-
ness, and death. Treatment is the same
as for diabetes unless the cause is fast-
ing or starvation, in which case a
nutritious diet is usually effective.
keyhole surgery Another name for
minimally invasive surgery.
kidney Either of the 2 organs that filter
the blood and excrete waste products
and excess water as urine. The kidneys
are situated at the back of the abdominal
cavity, on either side of the spine. Each
kidney is surrounded by a fibrous cap-
sule and is made up of an outer cortex
and an inner medulla.
Renal artery
Renal
vein
Ureter
Fat Renal pelvis
Calyx
Glomerulus
of nephron
Cortex
Medulla
327
adolescents and obese people. It is not
serious and usually clears up on its
own. In severe cases, applying a mixture
of  salicylic acid and soft paraffin and
scrubbing with a loofah may help.
keratotomy, radial A now uncommon
procedure in which radiating incisions
are made in the cornea  (up to, but not
through, its innermost layer) to reduce
myopia. Radial keratotomy has been
largely replaced by laser procedures,
such as LASIK, which carry less risk of
permanent damage to the eye. 
kerion A red, boggy, pustular swelling
that develops as a reaction to a fungal
infection, usually scalp ringworm (see
tinea). The inflammation gradually sub-
sides over 6每8 weeks, but, if severe, may
leave a scar and permanent hair loss in
the affected area. Oral  antifungal drugs
need to be taken for several weeks.
kernicterus A rare disorder in which
newborn, especially premature, infants
suffer brain damage because of severe
jaundice (see jaundice, neonatal). 
ketamine  A general  anaesthetic, given
by injection. It is mainly given to chil-
dren undergoing painful procedures,
such as bone marrow biopsy. Ketamine
is often abused for its stimulant effect.
ketoacidosis A combination of acidosis
and ketosis.
ketoconazole An  antifungal drug used
to treat fungal infections of the gut, skin,
and finger nails, and candidiasis (thrush)
of the mouth or vagina. It is also used
as a shampoo to treat dandruff. Adverse
effects include nausea and rash.
ketone  Any of a group of chemicals
related to acetone, which is found in
solvents such as nail polish remover.
Certain ketones are produced during the
metabolism of fats. Excessive amounts
build up in the body in ketosis.
ketoprofen A type of  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug  (NSAID) prescribed
as an analgesic drug for injuries to soft
tissues, such as muscles and ligaments.
Ketoprofen also reduces joint pain and
stiffness in arthritic conditions. It may
cause abdominal pain, nausea, indiges-
tion, and increased risk of peptic ulcer.
ketosis A potentially serious condition
in which excessive amounts of chemi-
cals called  ketones accumulate in the
KIDNEY KERATOTOMY, RADIAL
K
KIDNEY
LOCATION
Renal capsule328
The cortex contains specialized capillar-
ies called glomeruli, which, together
with a series of tubules, make up the
nephrons, the filtering units of the kid-
ney. The nephrons filter blood under
pressure and then selectively reabsorb
water and certain other substances back
into the blood. Urine is formed from
substances that are not reabsorbed.
The urine is conducted through tubules
to the renal pelvis (the central collecting
area of the kidney) and then through
tubes called ureters to the bladder. 
The kidneys also regulate the body＊s
fluid balance. To do this, the kidneys
excrete excess water, and when water is
lost from the body (for example as a
result of sweating), they conserve it (see
ADH). In addition, the kidneys control
the body＊s acid每base balance by adjust-
ing urine acidity. The kidneys are also
involved in hormonal regulation of red
blood cell production and blood pressure.
kidney biopsy A procedure in which a
small sample of  kidney tissue is
removed and examined under a micro-
scope. Kidney  biopsy is performed to
investigate and diagnose serious kidney
disorders, such as  glomerulonephritis,
proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome, and
acute kidney failure,or to assess the kid-
neys＊ response to treatment. There are 2
basic techniques: percutaneous needle
biopsy, in which a hollow needle is
passed through the skin into the kidney
under local  anaesthesia; and open sur-
gery under general anaesthesia. 
kidney cancer  A cancerous tumour of
the  kidney. Most kidney cancers origi-
nate in the kidney itself, but in rare
cases cancer spreads to the kidney from
another organ. There are 3 main types
of kidney cancer. The most common,
renal cell carcinoma, usually occurs in
people over 40. Nephroblastoma (also
called Wilms＊ tumour) is a fast-growing
tumour that mainly affects children under
5. Transitional cell carcinoma arises from
cells lining the renal pelvis; it is more
common in smokers or those who have
taken analgesic drugs for a long time.
Symptoms of kidney cancer vary. It is
often symptomless in the early stages,
although later there may be blood in the
urine. All types require surgical removal
of the kidney and sometimes also of the
ureter. For nephroblastoma, surgery is
followed by treatment with  anticancer
drugs. Kidney cancer is likely to be fatal
if it has spread to other organs before
treatment is started.
kidney cyst A fluid-filled sac in the
kidney. Most kidney cysts are noncancer-
ous.Cysts commonly develop in people
over 50 and may occur singly or multi-
ply in 1 or both kidneys. Most cysts
occur for no known reason and do not
usually produce symptoms unless they
become large enough to cause pain in
the lower back due to pressure. However,
large numbers of cysts in the kidneys
may be associated with polycystic kidney
disease (see  kidney, polycystic), which
often leads to kidney failure. Treatment
of simple cysts is not usually necessary,
but  aspiration (withdrawal of fluid) or
surgical removal may be carried out if a
cyst is painful or recurs.
kidney disorders The kidneys are sus-
ceptible to a wide range of disorders.
However, since only 1 normal kidney is
needed for good health, disease is rarely
life-threatening unless it affects  both
kidneys and is at an advanced stage. 
Congenital abnormalities, such as
horseshoe kidney, are fairly common
and usually harmless. Serious inherited
disorders include polycystic kidney dis-
ease (see  kidney,  polycystic),  Fanconi＊s
syndrome, and renal tubular acidosis. 
Blood vessels in the kidneys can be
damaged by  shock,  haemolytic每uraemic
syndrome, polyarteritis nodosa, diabetes
mellitus, and systemic lupus erythemato-
sus. The filtering units may be inflamed
(see  glomerulonephritis).  Allergic reac-
tions to drugs, prolonged treatment
with  analgesic drugs, and some  antibi-
otics can damage kidney tubules.
Noncancerous kidney  tumours are rare,
as is kidney cancer. Metabolic disorders,
such as hyperuricaemia, may cause kid-
ney stones (see  calculus, urinary tract).
Infection of the kidney is called  pyelo-
nephritis. Hydronephrosis is caused by
urinary tract obstruction. In  crush syn-
drome, kidney function is disrupted by
proteins released into the blood from
damaged muscle. Hypertension can be
a cause and an effect of kidney damage.
KIDNEYBIOPSY KIDNEYDISORDERS
KOther effects of serious damage include
nephrotic syndrome and kidney failure. 
kidney failure A reduction in the func-
tion of the kidneys. Kidney failure can be
acute or chronic. In acute kidney failure,
kidney function often returns to normal
once the underlying cause has been dis-
covered and treated; in chronic kidney
failure, function is usually irreversibly
lost. Causes of acute kidney failure in-
clude a severe reduction in blood flow
to the kidneys, as occurs in  shock; an
obstruction to urine flow, for example
due to a  bladder tumour; or certain
rapidly developing types of kidney dis-
ease, such as glomerulonephritis. Chronic
kidney failure can result from a disease
that causes progressive damage to the
kidneys, such as  hypertension, long-
standing obstruction to urine flow, and
excessive use of analgesic drugs. 
The most obvious symptom of acute
kidney failure is usually oliguria (reduced
volume of urine). This leads to a build-up
of urea and other waste products in the
blood and tissues, which may cause
drowsiness, nausea, and breathlessness.
Symptoms of chronic kidney failure de-
velop more gradually and may include
nausea, loss of appetite, and weakness. 
If acute kidney failure is due to sudden
reduction in blood flow, blood volume
and pressure can be brought back to
normal by saline  intravenous infusion or
blood transfusion. Surgery may be needed
to remove an obstruction in the urinary
tract. Acute kidney disease may be treat-
edwith  corticosteroid drugs. Treatment
may also involve diuretic drugs and tem-
porary  dialysis (artificial purification of
the  blood). A high-carbohydrate, low-
protein diet with controlled fluid and
salt intake is important for both types
of kidney failure. Chronic kidney failure
may progress over months or years
towards end-stage kidney failure, which
is life-threatening. At this stage, long-
term  dialysis or a  kidney transplant is
the only effective treatment. 
kidney function tests Tests performed
to investigate kidney disorders. Urinalysis
is a simple test in which a urine sample is
examined under a microscope for blood
cells, pus cells, and casts (cells and
mucous material that accumulate inthe
tubules of the kidneys and pass into the
urine).  Urine may be tested for sub-
stances, suchas proteins, that leak into
the urine whenthe kidneys are damaged.
Kidney function can be assessed by
measuring the concentration in the
blood of substances,  such as  urea and
creatinine, that the kidneysnormally
excrete. Kidney function may also be
assessed by kidney imaging techniques.
kidney imaging Techniques for visual-
izing the kidneys, usually performed for
diagnosis.  Ultrasound scanning can be
used to identify kidney enlargement, a
cyst or tumour, and the site of any
blockage. Conventional X-rays show the
outline of the kidneys and most kidney
stones. Intravenous urography shows the
internal anatomy of the kidney and ure-
ters. Angiography is used to image
blood circulation through the kidneys.
CT scanning and MRI provide detailed
cross-sectional images and can show
abscesses or tumours. Two types of
radionuclide scanning  are used for the
kidney: DMSA and DTPA scanning. DMSA
is a substance given by intravenous in-
jection that binds to cells in the kidney
tubule, giving a single, static picture of
the kidneys. DTPA, also given intraven-
ously, is filtered in the kidneys and
passes out in the urine. Pictures taken at
intervals record its passage through the
urinary tract and show kidney function. 
kidney, polycystic An inherited disorder
in which both  kidneys are affected by
numerous  cysts that gradually enlarge
until most of the normal kidney tissue
is destroyed. Polycystic kidney disease is
distinguished from multiple simple kid-
ney cysts, which occur commonly with
age. There are 2 types of polycystic dis-
ease. The most common usually becomes
apparent in middle age, producing ab-
dominal swelling, pain, and blood in the
urine. As the disease progresses, hyper-
tension and  kidney failure may result.
The rare type causes enlargement of the
kidneys and kidney failure in infants and
young children. There is no effective
treatment for preserving kidney func-
tion in either type, but symptoms of
kidney failure can be treated by dialysis
and kidney transplant. 
kidney stone See calculus, urinary tract.
329
KIDNEY STONE KIDNEYFAILURE
Kkidney transplant An operation in
which a person with chronic kidney fail-
ure receives a healthy kidney, either from
a living donor or a cadaver. One donor
kidney is sufficient to maintain the
health of the recipient. The new kidney is
placed in the pelvis through an incision
in the abdomen and carefully positioned
so that it can be connected easily to a
nearby vein and artery and to the blad-
der. The diseased kidneys are left in place.
The transplant avoids the need for dia-
lysis and often allows a return to normal
lifestyle. Kidney transplantation is more
straightforward and common than the
transplantation of any other major organ.
kidney tumours Growths in the kidney.
Kidney tumours may be cancerous (see
kidney cancer) or noncancerous. Noncan-
cerous ones, such as  fibromas, lipomas,
and leiomyomas,are often symptomless,
although a haemangioma (composed of
a collection of blood vessels) may grow
very large and cause blood to appear in
the urine. Treatment is usually not need-
ed for noncancerous tumours unless they
are large or painful, in which case they
may be surgically removed.
kilocalorie  The unit of energy equal to
1,000  calories, abbreviated to kcal. In
dietetics, a kilocalorie is sometimes re-
ferred to simply as a Calorie (or C).
kilojoule The unit of energy equal to
1,000 joules, abbreviated to kJ. One kcal
(see kilocalorie) equals 4.2 kJ.
330
kiss of life A commonly used name for
artificial respiration.
kleptomania A recurring inability to
resist impulses to steal, often without
any desire for the stolen objects. The con-
dition is usually a sign of an immature
personality. It is sometimes associated
with depression, and may also result from
dementia or some forms of brain damage.
Klinefelter＊s syndrome A  chromoso-
mal abnormality in which a male has 1,
or occasionally more, extra X chromo-
somes in his cells, giving a complement
of XXY instead of XY. The risk of a baby
having the condition increases with
maternal age. Features of the syndrome
vary in severity and may not become
apparent until puberty, when  gynaeco-
mastia (breast enlargement) occurs and
the  testes remain small. Affected males
are usually infertile (see infertility). They
tend to be tall and thin with a female
body shape and absence of body hair.
Incidence of  learning difficulties is high-
er in people with Klinefelter＊s syndrome
than in the general population. There is
no cure for the disorder, but hormonal
treatment can induce secondary  sexual
characteristics, and mastectomy may be
used to treat gynaecomastia. 
Klumpke＊s paralysis Paralysis of the
lower arm, with wasting of the small
muscles in the hand, and numbness of
the fingers (excluding the thumb) and
of the inside of the forearm. Klumpke＊s
paralysis is caused by injury to the 1st
thoracic nerve (one of the spinal nerves)
in the  brachial plexus, which is usually
the result of dislocation of the shoulder.
knee The hinge  joint between the  femur
(thighbone) and tibia (shin). The patella
(kneecap) lies across the front of the
joint. Two protective discs of cartilage
called menisci (see meniscus) cover the
surfaces of the femur and tibia to reduce
friction.  Bursas (fluid-filled sacs) are
present above and below the patella
and behind the knee. External ligaments
on each side of the joint provide sup-
port. Cruciate ligaments within the joint
prevent overstraightening and overben-
ding of the knee. The quadriceps muscles
on the front of the thigh straighten the
knee; the hamstring muscles at the back
of the thigh bend it. 
KIDNEYTRANSPLANT KNEE
K
Transplanted
artery and vein 
KIDNEY TRANSPLANT
Transplanted
kidney
Nonfunctioning
kidneys
SITE OF
INCISION
Transplanted
ureter
Bladder331
Knee injuries are common. They include
ligament sprains, torn meniscus, disloca-
tion of the patella, and fracture of any of
the bones in the joint. Chondromalacia
patellae is common in adolescents.
kneecap See patella.
knee-joint replacement Surgery to re-
place a diseased  knee  joint with an
artificial substitute, usually a metal or
plastic implant. Knee-joint replacement
is most commonly carried out in older
people whose knees are severely affected
by osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis. 
knock-knee Inward curving of the legs
so that the knees touch, causing the
feet to be kept further apart. Knock-
knee is common in toddlers and may be
part of normal development. In adults
or children, it may be caused by a dis-
ease such as  rickets that softens the
bones; osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arth-
ritis of the knee; or a leg  fracture that
has not healed correctly. In children,the
condition usually disappears by age 10.
Knock-knee that persists, or is caused 
by a disorder, may require  osteotomy, 
in which the  tibia (shin) is cut and re-
aligned to straighten the leg. In adults,
knee-joint replacement may be needed. 
knuckle The name for a finger joint.
koilonychia A condition in which the
nails are dry, brittle, and thin, eventually
becoming spoon-shaped. It may be
caused by injury to the nail, and may
also be associated with iron-deficiency
anaemia or lichen planus.
Koplik＊s spots Tiny, grey-white spots
that appear in the mouth during the
incubation period of measles. 
Korsakoff＊s psychosis See Wernicke每
Korsakoff syndrome.
kraurosis vulvae See vulvitis.
kuru A rare, fatal infection of the brain
that affects some inhabitants of New
Guinea. The disease is caused by a ※slow§
virus or prion, which has a long incuba-
tion period and is spread by cannibalism.
Symptoms include progressivedifficulty
in controlling movements and dementia.
The study of kuru led to the identifica-
tion of prions, which also play a role in
Creutzfeldt每Jakob disease and BSE.
kwashiorkor A severe form of malnutri-
tion in young children that occurs
principally in poor rural areas in the
tropics. Affected children have stunted
growth and a puffy appearance due to
oedema. The liver often enlarges, dehy-
dration may develop, and the child
loses resistance to infection, which may
have fatal consequences. The more
advanced stages are marked by jaundice,
drowsiness, and a fall in body tempera-
ture. Initially, the child is frequently fed
with small amounts of milk, and vita-
min and mineral tablets. A nutritious
diet is then gradually introduced. Most
treated children recover, but those less
than 2 years old may suffer from perma-
nently stunted growth. 
kyphoscoliosis A combination of kyph-
osis and scoliosis.
kyphosis Excessive outward curvature of
the  spine. Kyphosis usually affects the
spine at the top of the back, resulting in
a hump or pronounced rounding of the
back. The condition may be caused by
any of a variety of  spine disorders. In
some cases, a  congenital abnormality
may be the cause. Treatment, which is
rarely successful, is of the underlying
disorder. When combined with a curva-
ture of the spine to one side (scoliosis),
the condition is known as kyphoscoliosis.
KYPHOSIS KNEECAP
K
External
ligaments
Cruciate
ligaments
Fibula
Femur
Fat
Meniscus
Synovial fluid
in bursa
Synovial
membrane
KNEE
Patella
Quadricepsmargin of the eye orbit and drains on to
the conjunctiva. It secretes tears during
crying and when the eye is irritated. The
accessory gland lies within the conjunc-
tiva, and maintains the normal tear film,
secreting it directly onto the conjunctiva.
Tears drain through the lacrimal puncta,
tiny openings towards the inner ends of
the upper and lower eyelids. The puncta
are connected by narrow tubes to the lac-
rimal sac, which lies within the lacrimal
bone on the side of the nose. Leading
from the sac is the nasolacrimal duct,
which opens inside the nose.
lactase deficiency A condition in which
there is an absence of lactase, an  en-
zyme that breaks down  lactose (milk
sugar), in the cells of the small intes-
tine. Lactase deficiency results in a
reduced ability to digest lactose, also
known as lactose intolerance. The condi-
tion may be permanent, or may occur
temporarily after gastroenteritis, par-
ticularly in young children. Symptoms
include abdominal cramps, bloating,
flatulence, and  diarrhoea, all of which
are caused by the laxative effect of the
undigested sugar in the intestines.
Treatment is with a lactose-free diet.
lactation The production and secretion
of breast milk (see breast-feeding).
lactic acid A weak acid that is produced
when body cells break down glucose by
anaerobic metabolism in order to pro-
duce energy. Lactic acid is produced by
muscles during vigorous exercise and is
one of the factors that contribute to
cramp. The acid is also produced in
body tissues when they receive insuffi-
cient oxygen due to impairment of their
332
labetalol A  beta-blocker drug that is
used to treat  hypertension and  angina
pectoris. Possible adverse effects include
indigestion, nausea, and, in rare cases,
depression and temporary impotence.
labia The folds of skin of the vulva that
protect the vaginal and urethral open-
ings. There are 2 pairs of labia. The
outer pair, the labia majora, are fleshy
folds that bear hair and contain sweat
glands. They cover the smaller, hairless
inner folds, the labia minora, which
meet to form the hood of the clitoris.
labile A term meaning unstable or likely
to undergo change. 
labour See childbirth.
labyrinth The collective term for the
convoluted structures of the inner  ear.
The first part of the labyrinth is the coch-
lea, which contains the mechanism of
hearing.Situated behind the cochlea
are 2 sacs (the saccule and the utricle)
and 3 fluid-filled semicircular canals, all
of which are concerned with balance.
labyrinthitis Inflammation of the  laby-
rinth. The condition is almost always
caused by bacterial or viral infection.
Viral labyrinthitis may develop during
illnesses such as influenza. Bacterial
labyrinthitis is commonly a complica-
tion of otitismedia. The main symptom
is  vertigo, sometimes with nausea,
vomiting, nystagmus, tinnitus, and hear-
ing loss. Viral labyrinthitis clears up on
its own, but symptoms are relieved by
antihistamine drugs. Immediate treat-
ment with antibiotic drugs is needed for
bacterial labyrinthitis, otherwise perma-
nent deafness or meningitis may result.
laceration A torn, irregular wound.
lacrimal apparatus The system that
produces and drains tears. The lacrimal
apparatus of the eye includes the main
and accessory lacrimal glands and the
nasolacrimal drainage duct. The main
gland lies just within the upper and outer
LABETALOL LACTIC ACID
L
LACRIMAL APPARATUS
Lacrimal
(tear)
gland
Lacrimal
puncta
Lacrimal
sac
Nasolacrimal
duct
Land mild dermatitis. Occasionally, it may
cause an allergic reaction.
lansoprazole A drug used to treat dis-
orders caused by excess stomach acid,
such as peptic ulcer and acid reflux. Side
effects of lansoprazole include ab-
dominal pain, diarrhoea, constipation,
headache, and dizziness.
lanugo hair Fine, soft, downy hair that
covers a fetus. Lanugo hair first appears
in the 4th or 5th month of gestation 
and usually disappears by the 9th month.
It can still be seen in some premature
babies. Lanugo hair sometimes reap-
pears in adults who have cancer. It may
also occur in those with  anorexia ner-
vosa or be a side effect of certain drugs,
especially ciclosporin.
laparoscopy Examination of the inter-
ior of the abdomen using a laparoscope,
which is a type of  endoscope. Laparo-
scopy is widely used in  gynaecology.
Surgical procedures such as  appendi-
cectomy and  cholecystectomy are now
often performed laparoscopically (see
minimallyinvasive surgery).
laparotomy Any operation in which the
abdomen is opened either for diagnos-
tic purposes or for surgical treatment.
larva migrans Infections that are char-
acterized by the presence of the larval
(immature) forms of certain worms in
LAPAROSCOPY
333
blood supply in a heart attack (see
myocardial infarction or shock). 
lactobacillus A type of rod-shaped bacte-
ria  foundin fermented plant and dairy
products. Some types of lactobacilli
colonize the human intestine and the
vagina, where they prevent the overmul-
tiplication of harmful bacteria.
lactose One of the sugars present in
milk; a disaccharide carbohydrate.
lactose intolerance The inability to
digest lactose (see lactase deficiency).
lactulose A laxative drug that is used to
treat constipation.
lambliasis Another name for giardiasis.
laminectomy Surgical removal of part
or all of one or more laminae (the bony
arches on each vertebra) to expose the
spinal cord. Laminectomy is performed
as the first stage of spinal canal decom-
pression (see decompression, spinal canal).
lamivudine A reverse transcriptase inhi-
bitor drug used in the treatment of HIV
infection. Often, when the treatment is
started, 3 drugs are used: 2 reverse tran-
scriptase inhibitors and a third drug
from another class, such as a protease
inhibitor. Lamivudine may also be used
to treat longstanding  hepatitis B  infec-
tions. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea
are the most common side effects.
lamotrigine  An  anticonvulsant drug
used either alone or in combination
with other anticonvulsants in the treat-
ment of epilepsy. It can cause a number
of minor side effects, such as nausea,
headache, and blurred vision. Rarely,
serious skin reactions may occur, par-
ticularly in children. In addition, there
may be flu-like symptoms, bruising, sore
throat, and facial swelling, which should
be reported to a doctor promptly.
lance To incise using a lancet or a surgi-
cal scalpel.
lancet A small, pointed, double-edged
knife used to open and drain lesions,
such as boils and abscesses.
language disorders Problems affect-
ing the ability to communicate and/or
comprehend the spoken and/or written
word (see speech; speech disorders).
lanolin A mixture of purified water and
a yellow, oily substance obtained from
sheep＊s wool. Lanolin is used as an
emollient in the treatment of dry skin
LARVA MIGRANS LACTOBACILLUS
L
SITES OF
INCISION
Manipulating
probe
Bladder
Illuminated
area
Laparoscope
Uterine
manipulator
Ovary
Uterus
GYNAECOLOGICAL LAPAROSCOPY334
the body.  Visceral larva migrans (toxo-
cariasis) is caused by a type of worm
that normally  parasitizes dogs.  Cutane-
ous larva migrans(creeping eruption) is
caused by a form of hookworm infesta-
tion; the larvae penetrate the skin and
move around, leaving intensely itchy
red lines sometimes accompanied by
blistering. Both types of larva migrans
can be treated with anthelmintic drugs.
laryngeal nerve One of a pair of
nerves that carry instructions from the
brain to the larynx and send sensations
from the larynx to the brain.
laryngectomy Surgical removal of all
or part of the  larynx to treat advanced
cancer (see  larynx, cancer of). After the
operation, many patients learn to speak
using their  oesophagus. There are also
mechanical devices available that are
designed to help generate speech.
laryngitis Inflammation of the  larynx.
Laryngitis may be acute, lasting only a
few days, or chronic, persisting for a long
period. Acute laryngitis is usually caused
by a viral infection, such as a cold, but
can also be due to an  allergy. Chronic
laryngitis may be caused by overuse of
the voice; violent coughing; irritation
from tobacco smoke, alcohol, or fumes;
or damage during surgery. Hoarseness is
the most common symptom and may
progress to loss of voice. There may also
be throat pain or discomfort and a dry,
irritating cough. Laryngitis due to a viral
infection is often accompanied by fever
and a general feeling of illness. If sputum
(phlegm) is coughed up, or if hoarse-
ness persists for more than 2 weeks,
medical advice should be sought.
laryngoscopy Examination of the  lar-
ynx using a mirror held against the back
of the palate (indirect laryngoscopy), or
a rigid or flexible viewing tube called a
laryngoscope (direct laryngoscopy).
laryngotracheobronchitis Inflamma-
tion of the  larynx, trachea, and bronchi,
caused by a viral or a bacterial infec-
tion. The disorder is usually mild, but
can be life-threatening. It is a common
cause of croup in young children.
larynx The organ in the throat respon-
siblefor voice production, commonly
called the voice-box. The larynx lies be-
tween the  pharynx and the  trachea. It
consists of areas of cartilage, the largest
of which is the thyroid cartilage that
projects to form the Adam＊s apple. Below
it are the cricoid cartilage and the 2
pyramid-shaped arytenoid cartilages.
Inside the larynx are 2 fibrous sheets
of tissue, the  vocal cords, which vibrate
to produce vocal sounds when air from
the lungs passes through them. These
vibrations are modified by the tongue,
mouth, and lips to produce speech.
Attached to the top of the thyroid car-
tilage is the epiglottis, a leaf-shaped flap
of cartilage that drops over the larynx to
prevent food from entering the trachea
when swallowing. 
larynx, cancer of A cancerous tumour
of the  larynx. The exact causes of this
cancer are not known, but smoking and
high alcohol consumption may be asso-
ciated factors. Hoarseness is the main
symptom, particularly when the tumour
originates on the  vocal cords. At an
advanced stage, symptoms may include
difficulty in breathing and swallowing,
and coughing up blood. 
If  laryngoscopy reveals a tumour on
the larynx, a biopsy is carried out. If the
tumour is small,  radiotherapy or  laser
treatment may be used. For unrespon-
sive and large tumours, partial or total
laryngectomy may be considered.
larynx, disorders of Laryngeal disor-
ders (those affecting the larynx) usually
cause hoarseness as they interfere with
LARYNGEAL NERVELARYNX, DISORDERS OF
L
LARYNX
Epiglottis
Tonsil
Nasal
cavity
Pharynx
Vocal cords
Trachea
Larynxthe functioning of the  vocal cords. In
adults, the most common laryngeal dis-
order is  laryngitis. In children,  croup is
common up to the age of 4. Much rarer
is epiglottitis, a life-threatening disorder
in young children. Rarely, a baby is born
with a soft, limp larynx, a condition called
laryngomalacia, which causes noisy brea-
thingduring feeding; the larynx usually
attainsnormal firmness by the age of 2.
Various kinds of tumour may develop
on the vocal cords. The most common is
a polyp (a noncancerous swelling caused
by smoking, an infection such as influ-
enza, or straining the voice). Warts and
small noncancerous growths called sing-
er＊snodes can also occur on the vocal
cords. The larynx may also be affected by
cancerous tumours (see larynx, cancer of).
laser A device that produces a concen-
trated beam of light radiation; ※laser§ is
an acronym for ※light amplification by
stimulated emission of radiation§. (See
laser treatment.) 
laser treatment Use of a laser beam in
a variety of medical procedures. High-
intensity laser beams cut through tissue
and cause blood clotting. They can be
used in surgery and to destroy abnor-
mal blood vessels. Lasers are frequently
used in ophthalmology to treat eye dis-
orders, in gynaecology (for example, to
unblock fallopian tubes), and to remove
birthmarks and tattoos.
LASER TREATMENT
335
LASIK The abbreviation for laser-assisted
in-situ keratomileusis, a type of eye sur-
gery in which a laser is used to reshape
the  cornea to correct refractive  errors
(see refraction) such as shortsightedness
(see myopia) and astigmatism.
Lassa fever A dangerous infectious
disease caused by a virus carried by
rodents. Lassa fever is largely confined
to West Africa. The illness starts with
fever, headache, muscular aches, and a
sore throat. Later, severe diarrhoea and
vomiting develop. In extreme cases, the
disease can be fatal. Treatment is injec-
tions of the drug  ribavirin and serum
containing antibodies to the virus.
lassitude A term describing a feeling of
tiredness, weakness, or exhaustion.
lateral Relating to, or situated on, one
side. ※Bilateral§ means ※on both sides§.
latissimus dorsi A large, flat, triangu-
lar muscle in the back. Contraction of
the muscle moves the arm downwards
and backwards.
laudanum A solution of opium, former-
ly used as a sedative and painkiller and
in the treatment of diarrhoea.
laughing gas The popular name for
nitrous oxide. 
Laurence每Biedl每Moon syndrome A
rare inherited disorder characterized by
increasing  obesity, retinitispigmentosa
that may lead to blindness, learning dif-
ficulties, polydactyly, and hypogonadism.
(See also genetic disorders.)
lavage, gastric Washing out the stom-
ach with water, usually to remove toxins.
laxative drugs A group of drugs used
to treat  constipation. There are various
types. Bulk-forming laxatives increase
the volume and softness of faeces and
make them easier to pass. Stimulant
laxatives stimulate the intestinal wall to
contract and speed up the elimination
of faeces. Lubricant laxatives soften and
facilitate the passage of faeces. Osmotic
laxatives increase the water content and
volume of the faeces. If used in excess,
laxative drugs may cause diarrhoea,
abdominal cramps, and flatulence, and
may impair normal bowel function.
lazy eye An ambiguous name for the
visual defect that commonly results
from squint (see amblyopia).
LDL See low density lipoprotein.
LDL LASER
L
Safety goggles to
protect the eyes
Laser
probe
Laser
unit
Dermatologist
Reclining chair
LASER SKIN TREATMENT336
lead poisoning Damage to the  brain,
nerves, red  blood cells, and digestive
system, caused by inhaling lead fumes or
swallowing lead salts. Acute poisoning,
which occurs when a large amount of
lead is taken into the body over a short
period of time, is sometimes fatal.
Symptoms include severe, colicky ab-
dominal pain, diarrhoea, and vomiting.
There may also be  anaemia, loss of
appetite, and a blue, black, or grey line
along the gum margins. Lead poisoning
may be confirmed by blood and urine
tests. Chelating agents, such as penicil-
lamine, may be prescribed.
learning The process by which knowledge
or abilities are acquired, or behaviour is
modified. Various theories about learn-
ing have been proposed. Behavioural
theories emphasize the role of  condi-
tioning, and cognitive theories are based
on the concept that learning occurs
through the building of abstract ※cogni-
tive§ models, using mental capacities
such as intelligence, memory, insight,
and understanding.
learning difficulties Problems with learn-
ing, which result from a range of mental
and physical problems. Learning diffi-
culties may be either general or specific.
In general learning difficulties, all aspects
of mental and physical functioning may
be affected. Depending on the severity
of the problem, a child with general
learning difficulties may need to be
educated in a special school. Specific
learning difficulties include  dyslexia,
dyscalculia (the inability to solve math-
ematical problems), and dysgraphia
(writing disorders). Causes of learning
difficulties include deafness, speech dis-
orders, and disorders of  vision, as well
as genetic and chromosomal problems.
learning disability A learning difficulty.
leech A type of bloodsucking worm with
a flattened body and a sucker at each
end. Leeches of various types inhabit
tropical forests and waters. They bite
painlessly, introducing their saliva into
the wound before sucking blood. Leech
saliva contains an anticlotting sub-
stance called hirudin, which may cause
the wound to bleed for hours. Leeches
are sometimes used in medicine to drain
a haematoma from a wound.
leg, broken See femur, fracture of; fibula;
tibia.
legionnaires＊ disease A form of pneu-
monia that is caused by  LEGIONELLA
PNEUMOPHILA, a bacterium that breeds
in warm, moist conditions. The source
of infection is often an air-conditioning
system in a large, public building.
The first symptoms include headache,
muscular and abdominal pain, diarrhoea,
and a dry cough. Over the next few days,
pneumonia develops, resulting in a high
fever, shaking chills, coughing up of
thick sputum (phlegm), drowsiness, and
sometimes  delirium. Treatment is with
the antibiotic drug erythromycin. 
leg, shortening of Shortening of the leg
is usually caused by faulty healing of 
a fractured  femur (thigh-bone) or  tibia
(shin). Other causes are an abnormality
present from birth, surgery on the leg, or
muscle weakness associated with polio-
myelitis or another neurological disorder. 
leg ulcer An open sore on the leg that
fails to heal, usually resulting from poor
blood circulation to or from the area.
There are various types of ulcer. Venous
ulcers (also referred to as varicose or
stasis ulcers) occur mainly on the ankles
and lower legs and are caused by valve
failure in veins; they usually appear in
conjunction with varicoseveins. Bedsores
(decubitus ulcers) develop on pressure
spots on the legs due to a combination
of poor circulation, pressure, and immo-
bility over a long period. Leg ulcers can
also be due to  peripheralvascular dis-
ease and diabetes mellitus. In the tropics,
some infections can cause tropical ulcers.
leiomyoma A noncancerous tumour of
smooth muscle. Leiomyomas, also called
fibroids, usually occur in the uterus. More
rarely, they develop in the walls of blood
vessels in the skin, forming tender lumps.
Leiomyomas may require surgical re-
moval if they cause symptoms.
leishmaniasis Any of a variety of dis-
eases caused by single-celled parasites
called leishmania. These parasites are
harboured by dogs and rodents and are
transmitted by the bites of sandflies.
The most serious form of leishmaniasis
is called kala-azar or visceral leishmani-
asis. This disease is prevalent in some
parts of Asia, Africa, and South America,
LEAD POISONING LEISHMANIASIS
L337
and also occurs in some Mediterranean
countries. In addition, there are several
types of cutaneous leishmaniasis, some
of which are prevalent in the Middle
East, North Africa, and in the Mediter-
ranean. Kala-azar causes persistent fever,
enlargement of the  spleen,  anaemia,
and, later, darkening of the skin. The ill-
ness may develop any time up to 2
years after infection, and, if untreated,
may be fatal. The cutaneous forms have
the appearance of a persistent ulcer at
the site of the sandfly bite. 
All varieties of leishmaniasis can be
treated with drugs, such as sodium sti-
bogluconate, given by intramuscular or
intravenous injection.
lens The internal optical component of
the  eye responsible for focusing; also
called the crystalline lens. It is situated
behind the  iris and is suspended on
delicate fibres from the ciliary body. The
lens is elastic, transparent, and slightly
less convex on the front surface than on
the back. Changing its curvature alters
the focus so that near or distant objects
can be seen sharply (see  accommoda-
tion). Opacification of the lens is called
cataract. (See also lens dislocation.)
lens dislocation Displacement of the
crystalline lens from its normal position
in the eye. Lens dislocation is almost
always caused by an injury that ruptures
the fibres connecting the lens to the cil-
iary body. In Marfan＊ssyndrome, these
fibres are particularly weak and lens dis-
location is common. 
A dislocated lens may produce severe
visual distortion or double vision, and
sometimes causes a form of glaucoma if
drainage of fluid from the front of the
eye is affected. If glaucoma is severe,
the lens may need to be removed. (See
also aphakia.)
lens implant A plastic  prosthesis used
to replace the removed opaque  lens in
cataract surgery.
lentigo A flat, brown area of skin similar
to a freckle. Lentigines (the plural of
lentigo) are usually harmless and need
no treatment. However, any areas of
raised, darker brown skin within a len-
tigo need investigation, as such areas
could develop into malignant melan-
omas (see melanoma,malignant).
leprosy See Hansen＊s disease.
leptin A  protein that has a role in the
regulation of fat storage by the body.
leptospirosis A rare disease caused by
a type of  spirochaete bacterium that is
harboured by rodents and excreted in
their urine. It is also known as Weil＊s
disease. Symptoms include fever, chills,
headache, severe muscle aches, and a
skin rash. Kidney and liver damage are
also common. Antibiotic drugs are effec-
tive treatment but kidney and liver
function may recover only slowly. The
nervous system may also be affected,
often producing signs of meningitis.
lesion An all-encompassing term for any
abnormality of structure or function in
any part of the body. The term may refer
to a wound, infection, tumour, abscess,
or chemical abnormality.
lethargy A feeling of  tiredness, drowsi-
ness, or lack of energy.
leukaemia Any of several types of can-
cer in which there is a disorganized
proliferation of white blood cells within
the bone marrow. Organs such as the
liver, spleen, lymph nodes, or brain may
cease to function properly if they be-
come infiltrated by abnormal cells.
Leukaemias are classified into  acute
and chronic types (acute types generally
develop faster than chronic leukaemia).
They are also classified according to the
type of white cell that is proliferating
abnormally. If the abnormal cells are
lymphocytes or lymphoblasts (precursors
of lymphocytes), the leukaemia is called
LEUKAEMIA LENS
L
Iris
Retina
Cornea
Lens
LENS
Ciliary body338
lymphocytic or lymphoblastic leukaemia.
If abnormal cells are derived from other
types of white cell or their precursors,
the disease is called myeloid, myelo-
blastic, or granulocytic leukaemia. (See
also leukaemia, acute; leukaemia, chronic
lymphocytic; leukaemia, chronic myeloid.)
leukaemia, acute A type of  leukaemia
in which excessive numbers of immature
white blood cells called blasts are pro-
duced in the bone marrow. If untreated,
acute leukaemia can be fatal within a
few weeks or months. The abnormal
cells may be of 2 types: lymphoblasts
(immature  lymphocytes) in acute lym-
phoblastic leukaemia, and myeloblasts
(immature forms of other types of white
cell) in acute myeloblastic leukaemia. 
Exposure to certain chemicals (such
as benzene and some anticancer drugs)
or high levels of radiation may be a cause
in some cases. Inherited factors may also
play a part; there is increased incidence
in people with certain genetic disorders
(such as  Fanconi＊s anaemia) and chro-
mosomal abnormalities (such as Down＊s
syndrome). People with blood disorders
such as chronic myeloid leukaemia (see
leukaemia, chronic myeloid) and primary
polycythaemia are at increased risk, as
their bone marrow is already abnormal.
The symptoms and signs of acute
leukaemia include bleeding gums, easy
bruising, headache, bone pain, enlarged
lymph nodes, and symptoms of anaemia,
such as  tiredness, pallor, and breath-
lessness on exertion. There may also be
repeated chest or throat infections. The
diagnosis is based on a  bone marrow
biopsy. Treatment includes transfusions
of blood and platelets, the use of anti-
cancer drugs, and possibly radiotherapy.
A bone marrowtransplant may also be
required. The outlook depends on the
type of leukaemia and the age of the
patient.  Chemotherapy has increased
success rates and 6 in 10 children with
the disease can now be cured, although
treatment is less likely to be completely
successful in adults.
leukaemia, chronic lymphocytic A
type of  leukaemia caused by prolifera-
tion of mature lymphocytes. Although it
is incurable, the disease is not always
fatal. The cause is unknown.
Symptoms develop slowly, often over
many years. As well as symptoms and
signs common to acute forms of leuk-
aemia (see leukaemia, acute), there may
be enlargement of the  liver and spleen,
persistent raised temperature, and night
sweats. Diagnosis is by blood tests and
a  bone marrowbiopsy. In many mild
cases, no treatment is needed. To treat
severe cases, anticancer drugs are given,
sometimes with radiotherapy.
leukaemia, chronic myeloid A type of
leukaemia, also called chronic granulo-
cytic leukaemia, which is caused by the
overproduction of granulocytes, neutro-
phils, or polymorphonuclear leukocytes
(see blood cells). The cause is unknown.
This type of leukaemia usually has 2
phases: a chronic phase, which may last
for several years, and a more cancerous
phase, which is known as the blastic,
accelerated, or acute phase. 
During the chronic phase, symptoms
may include fever, night sweats, and
weight loss. Visual disturbances, abdom-
inal pain, and priapism may also occur.
The symptoms of the more cancerous
phase are like those of the acute forms
of leukaemia (see leukaemia, acute). The
diagnosis is made from blood tests and
a bone marrow biopsy. Treatment of the
chronic phase includes anticancer drugs.
When the disease transforms into the
acute phase, treatment is similar to that
given for acute leukaemia.
leukocyte Any type of white blood cell.
leukodystrophies A rare group of in-
herited childhood diseases in which the
myelin sheaths that form a protective
covering around many nerves are des-
troyed. These diseases cause severely
disabling conditions, such as impaired
speech,  blindness,  deafness, and  para-
lysis, and are always fatal. 
leukoplakia Raised white patches on
the mucous membranes of the mouth or
vulva, caused by tissue thickening. It is
most common in the elderly and is
increasingly found in people with AIDS.
Leukoplakia in the mouth, which most
commonly occurs on the tongue, is 
usually due to tobacco-smoking or to
rubbing by a rough tooth or denture. It
is not known what causes the condition
to develop on the vulva. 
LEUKAEMIA, ACUTE LEUKOPLAKIA
L339
The patches are usually harmless,
although occasionally they result in a
cancerous change in the affected tissue.
If the condition persists, the patches
are removed under local  anaesthesia
and tissue is examined microscopically
for signs of malignant change. (See also
mouth cancer; vulva, cancer of.)
leukorrhoea See vaginal discharge.
leukotriene receptor antagonists A
group of antiallergy drugs, such as mon-
telukast and zafirlukast, used to prevent
symptoms of mild to moderate asthma.
The drugs work by blocking the effects
of leukotrienes 每 naturally occurring sub-
stances released in the lungs during an
allergic reaction.
Because they are not  bronchodilator
drugs, and will not relieve an existing
attack, they are usually used withbron-
chodilators and inhaled  corticosteroids
to reduce the frequency of attacks. 
Side effects include gastrointestinal
disturbances and headache.  Skin and
hypersensitivity reactions may also occur.
levamisole  An  anthelmintic drug given
by mouth in a single dose to eliminate
roundworm infestation. Side effects of
levamisole are rare but can include mild
nausea or vomiting.
levodopa A drug used to treat  Parkin-
son＊s disease. Side effects include nausea,
vomiting, nervousness, and agitation.
levonorgestrel A progestogen drug used
in some oral contraceptives. 
levothyroxine A synthetic version of
the  thyroid hormone thyroxine, used to
treat hypothyroidism. Side effects, such
as rapid heartbeat and tremor, may occur
if the initial dose is too high.
LH The abbreviation for  luteinizing hor-
mone.
LH-RH The abbreviation for  luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone.
libido Sexual desire. Loss of libido is a
symptom of many physical illnesses and
of  depression,  drug abuse, and  alcohol
abuse. (See also sexual desire, inhibited.)
lice Small, wingless insects that feed 
on human blood. There are 3 species:
PEDICULUS HUMANUS CAPITIS (the head
louse), PEDICULUS HUMANUS CORPORIS (the
body louse), and PHTHIRUS PUBIS (the crab,
or pubic, louse). All have flattened bod-
ies and measure up to 3 mm across. 
Head lice live on the scalp and their
bite causes intense itching. They are
spread by direct contact. Their tiny eggs
(nits) attach to hairs close to the scalp.
Body lice live and lay eggs on clothing
next to the skin. They can transmit epi-
demic  typhus and  relapsingfever. Crab
lice live in pubic hair or, more rarely, in
armpits, beards, or eyelashes; they are
usually transmitted during sexual contact
(see  pubic lice). Various preparations
can be applied to kill lice and eggs.
lichenification Thickening and harden-
ing of the  skin caused by repeated
scratching, often to relieve the intense
itching of disorders such as  atopic
eczema or lichen simplex.
lichen planus A common  skin disease
of unknown cause that usually affects
middle-aged people. Small, shiny, in-
tensely itchy, pink or purple raised spots
appear on the skin of the wrists, fore-
arms, or lower legs. There is often a lacy
network of white spots covering the
inside lining of the cheeks. The disease
is treated with topical steroid drugs.
lichen sclerosus et atrophicus A
chronic skin condition of the anogenital
area. The skin is scarred and white, and
the anatomy of areas such as the vagi-
nal opening or the foreskin may become
distorted. Treatment is with potent top-
ical steroid drugs.
lichen simplex Patches of thickened,
itchy, sometimes discoloured skin, due
to repeated scratching. Typical sites are
the neck, wrist, elbow area, and ankles.
Lichen simplex is most common in
women and is often stress-related. Treat-
ment is with oral antihistaminedrugs and
creams containing  corticosteroid drugs,
and may also involve addressing any
underlying stress or anxiety.
lid lag A momentary delay in the nor-
mal downward movement of the upper
eyelids that occurs when the eye looks
down. Lid lag is a characteristic feature
of  thyrotoxicosis, and usually occurs in
conjunction with exophthalmos.
lidocaine A local anaesthetic (see  an-
aesthesia, local) used to numb tissues
before minor surgical procedures, and
as a nerve block.
life expectancy The number of years a
person can expect to live. Life expectancy
LIFE EXPECTANCY LEUKORRHOEA
Llightening A feeling experienced by
many pregnant women when the baby＊s
head descends into the pelvic cavity.
Lightening usually occurs in the final 3
weeks of pregnancy, leaving more space
in the upper abdomen and relieving
pressure under the diaphragm. 
light treatment See phototherapy.
lignocaine Former name for lidocaine.
limb, artificial An artificial leg or arm,
known medically as a prosthesis, which is
fitted to replace a limb that has been
missing from birth or lost as a result of
amputation (see limb defects).
limb defects Incomplete development
of one or more limbs at birth. Limb
defects are rare and may be inherited or
form part of a syndrome. In a condition
called  phocomelia, hands, feet, or tiny
finger- or toe-buds are attached to limb
stumps or grow directly from the trunk.
The sedative drug  thalidomide, when
taken by pregnant women, is known to
have caused phocomelia in fetuses. 
limbic system A ring-shaped area in
the centre of the  brain consisting of a
number of connected clusters of nerve
cells. The limbic system plays a role in
influencing the  autonomic nervous sys-
tem, which automatically regulates body
functions; the emotions; and the sense
of smell. The system is extensive, and
contains various different substructures
including the  hippocampus, the cingu-
late gyrus, and the amygdala.
can be estimated
assuming that pat-
ternsof health and
illness in a commu-
nity do not change.
life support The
process of keeping
a person alive by
artificially inflating
the lungs (see ven-
tilation) and, if it is
needed, maintain-
ing the heartbeat.
ligament A band
of tough,  fibrous,
partly elastic tis-
sue. Ligaments are
important compo-
nents of joints; they bind the bone ends
together and prevent excessive move-
ment. They also support various internal
organs. Minor ligament injuries such as
sprains are treated with ice, bandaging,
and sometimes physiotherapy. If a liga-
ment has been torn (ruptured), the joint
is either immobilized by a plaster cast to
allow healing or repaired surgically. 
ligation The surgical process of tying off
a duct or a blood vessel with a  ligature
in order to stop bleeding. The term is
used in tubal ligation, a form of steril-
ization in which the fallopian tubes are
tied off (see sterilization, female).
ligature A length of thread or other
material used for ligation.
340
LIMBIC SYSTEM
L
LIMBIC SYSTEM
LOCATION
Parahippocampal
gyrus Amygdala
Olfactory bulb
Column of fornix
Fornix Cingulate gyrus
Septum pellucidum
Mamillary
body 
Pons
Hippocampus
Midbrain
Bone
Synovial
fluid
Synovial
membrane
Cartilage
Ligament
TYPICAL JOINT
Brainstem
LIGAMENT
LIFE SUPPORT341
limp An abnormal pattern of walking in
which the movements of one leg (or of
the hip on one side of the body) are dif-
ferent from those of the other. A limp in
a child should always be seen within 24
hours as it may result from a hip prob-
lem that requires treatment.
linctus A bland, usually sweetened mix-
ture taken to soothe irritation caused
by an inflamed  throat. A simple linctus
contains no active drug, but linctuses
are commonly used as a basis for cough
suppressants (see cough remedies).
lindane A drug formerly used to treat
infestation by scabies and some types of
lice. Lindane has now been replaced by
other, less toxic drugs.
linear accelerator A device for accel-
erating subatomic particles, such as
electrons, to a speed approaching that
of light so that they have extremely high
energies. A linear accelerator can also
be used to generate high-energy X-rays.
High-energy electrons or X-rays are used
in radiotherapy to treat certain cancers.
liniment A liquid rubbed on the skin to
relieve aching muscles and stiff joints.
Liniments may contain rubefacients
(substances that increase blood flow be-
neath the skin), or certain drugs, such
as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
liothyronine A thyroid hormone used as
replacement therapy in hypothyroidism.
Liothyronine acts more quickly than
levothyroxine and is cleared from the
body more rapidly. 
lip One of 2 fleshy folds around the
entranceto  the mouth. The main sub-
structureof  the lips is a ring of muscle
that helps to produce speech. Smaller
muscles at the corners of the lips are
responsible for facial expression. Disor-
ders of the lips include  chappedskin,
cheilitis, cold sores, and lip cancer.
lip cancer A malignant tumour, usually
on the lower  lip. Lip cancer is largely
confined to older people, particularly
those who have been exposed to a lot
of sunlight and those who have smoked
cigarettes or a pipe for many years. The
first symptom is a white patch that
develops on the lip and soon becomes
scaly and cracked with a yellow crust.
The affected area grows and eventually
becomes ulcerated. In some cases, the
cancer spreads to the  lymph nodes in
the jaw and neck. Lip cancer (usually a
squamous cell carcinoma) is diagnosed
by biopsy. Treatment is surgical removal,
radiotherapy, or a combination of both.
lipectomy, suction A type of bodycon-
tour surgery in which excess fat is
sucked out through a small skin incision.
lipid disorders Metabolic disorders that
result in abnormal amounts of lipids (fats)
in the body. The most common lipid dis-
orders are the  hyperlipidaemias, which
are characterized by high levels of lipids
in the blood and can cause atheroscle-
rosis and  pancreatitis. There are also
some very rare lipid disorders due solely
to heredity, such as Tay每Sachs disease.
lipid-lowering drugs A group of drugs
used to treat  hyperlipidaemia. These
drugs help to prevent, or slow the pro-
gression of, severe  atherosclerosis and
coronary artery disease. The most com-
monly used types are statins and fibrates.
lipids A general term for  fats and oils.
Lipids include triglycerides (simple fats),
phospholipids (important constituents
of cell membranes and nerve tissue),
and sterols, such as cholesterol.
lipoma A common noncancerous tumour
of fatty tissue. Lipomas are slow-growing,
soft swellings that may occur anywhere
on the body, most commonly on the
thigh, trunk, or shoulder. They are pain-
less and harmless, but may be surgically
removed for cosmetic reasons.
lipoprotein Particles comprising a fatty
core and protein outer layer (apolipro-
tein) that allow the transport of fats in
the bloodstream. Genetic variations in
the structure of apoliproteins and lipo-
proteins play an important part in
determining susceptibility to cardiovas-
cular disorders and Alzheimer＊s disease.
liposarcoma A rare cancer of fatty tissue
that most commonly develops during
late middle age. Liposarcomas produce
firm swellings, usually in the abdomen
or the thigh. The tumours can generally
be removed by surgery but tend to recur.
liposuction The popular term for suc-
tion lipectomy (see lipectomy, suction).
lip-reading A way of understanding
speech by interpreting movements of
the mouth and tongue. Lip-reading is
often used by people who are deaf.
LIP-READING LIMP
Lliquid paraffin A lubricant  laxative
drug obtained from petroleum. It can
cause anal irritation, and prolonged use
may impair the absorption of vitamins
from the intestine into the blood.
lisinopril An  ACE inhibitor drug com-
monly used to treat hypertension.
lisp A common  speechdisorder caused
by protrusion of the tongue between the
teeth so that the ※s§ sound is replaced
by ※th§. Sometimes the cause is a cleft
palate (see cleft lip and palate). In most
children, there is no physical defect and
lisping disappears by the age of about 4.
listeriosis An infection that is common
in animals and may also affect humans.
It is caused by the bacterium  LISTERIA
MONOCYTOGENES, which is widespread in
the environment, especially in soil. Pos-
sible sources of human infection include
soft cheese, ready-prepared coleslaw and
salads, and improperly cooked meat. 
In most adults, the only symptoms are
fever and aching muscles. There may also
be sore throat, conjunctivitis, diarrhoea,
and abdominal pain.  Pneumonia, septi-
caemia, and meningitis may develop in
severe cases. However, listeriosis can be
life-threatening, particularly in elderly
people, those with reduced immunity,
and newborn babies. In pregnant women,
infection may cause a miscarriage. 
The condition is diagnosed by  blood
tests and analysis of other body fluids,
such as urine. Treatment is with antibi-
otic drugs, such as ampicillin.
lithium A drug used in the long-term
treatment of mania and manic-depressive
illness. High levels of lithium in the blood
may cause vomiting, diarrhoea, blurred
vision, tremor, drowsiness, rash, and, in
rare cases, kidney damage.
lithotomy Surgical removal of a calculus
(stone) from part of the  urinary tract.
The procedure is only performed for
large stones; smaller stones are usually
crushed and removed using cystoscopy,
or pulverized ultrasonically by lithotripsy.
lithotomy position Position in which a
patient lies on his or her back with the
hips and knees bent and the legs wide
apart. Once used for lithotomy, the posi-
tion is still used for pelvic examinations
and some types of pelvic surgery.
lithotripsy The process of using shock
waves or ultrasonic waves to break up
calculi (stones) inside the kidneys, upper
ureters, and  gallbladder for excretion.
342
LIQUID PARAFFIN LITHOTRIPSY
L
LITHOTRIPSY
Shock-wave
generator
Lead apron
Monitors X-ray beam to locate
kidney stones
X-ray source
Water- or gel-
filled cushion
Control
unit
X-ray receiver
Shock waves
EXTRACORPOREAL LITHOTRIPSY343
There are 2 different procedures: extra-
corporeal shock-wave lithotripsy (ESWL),
performed to break up small stones, and
percutaneous lithotripsy, performed on
larger stones. ESWL uses a machine
called a  lithotripter, which produces
external shock waves. In percutaneous
lithotripsy, a nephroscope (an instru-
ment for viewing the kidney) is inserted
into the kidney and an ultrasonic probe
is directed through the nephroscope to
destroy the stone. Ureteric colic (severe
spasmodic pain in the side, occurring if
the ureter is obstructed by small frag-
ments of stone) may occur after ESWL.
People treated for gallstones may need
drug treatment to aid the final elimina-
tion of stone residues.
lithotripter The machine used in extra-
corporeal shock-wave lithotripsy (ESWL)
to disintegrate small calculi (stones).
livedo reticularis A net-like, purple or
blue mottling of the skin, usually on the
lower legs, caused by the enlargement of
blood vessels beneath the skin. It is more
common in people with  vasculitis and
those who suffer from excessive sensi-
tivity to cold. The condition is harmless,
and tends to be worse in cold weather.
liver The largest organ of the body, this
roughly wedge-shaped, red-brown struc-
ture lies in the upper right abdominal
cavity, directly below the diaphragm. The
liver is divided into 2 main lobes, each
consisting of many lobules. These lob-
ules are surrounded by branches of the
hepatic artery, which supplies the liver
with oxygenated blood, and the portal
vein, which supplies nutrient-rich blood.
Deoxygenated blood from the liver drains
into the hepatic veins. A network of
ducts carries  bile from the liver to the
gallbladder and the small intestine.
The liver plays a vital role in the body
because it produces and processes a
wide range of chemical substances. The
substances produced include important
proteins for blood plasma, such as albu-
min. The liver also produces cholesterol
and special proteins that help the blood
to carry fats around the body. In addition,
liver  cells secrete  bile, which removes
waste products from the liver and aids
the breakdown and absorption of fats in
the small intestine (see biliary system). 
Another major function is the processing
of nutrients for use by cells. The liver
also stores excess glucose as glycogen.
In addition, it controls the blood level of
amino acids (the building blocks of pro-
teins). If the level of amino acids is too
high, the liver converts the excess into
glucose, proteins, other amino acids, or
urea (for excretion). 
Finally, the liver helps to clear the blood
of drugs and poisons. These substances
are broken down and excreted in the bile.
liver abscess A localized collection of
pus in the liver. The most common cause
is an intestinal infection. Bacteria may
spread from areas inflamed by divertic-
ulitis or  appendicitis, and  amoebae may
invade the liver as a result of amoebiasis.
The symptoms are high fever, pain in the
upper right abdomen, and (especially in
elderly people) mental confusion. Ultra-
sound scanning usually reveals the
abscess. It can sometimes be treated by
aspiration, but often surgery is needed.
liver biopsy A diagnostic test in which
a small sample of tissue is removed from
the liver, usually under local anaesthesia.
The main function of this test is to diag-
nose liver diseases. (See also biopsy.)
liver cancer A cancerous tumour in the
liver. The tumour may be primary (origi-
nating within the liver) or secondary
(having spread from elsewhere, often the
LIVER CANCER LITHOTRIPTER
L
Stomach
Portal vein
Left lobe
of liver
Falciform
ligament
Hepatic
vein
Common bile duct Gallbladder
Pancreas
Hepatic artery
LIVER
Duodenum
Diaphragm
Right lobe 
of liver344
stomach, pancreas, or large intestine).
There are 2 main types of primary tumour:
a hepatoma, which develops in the liver
cells, and a  cholangiocarcinoma, which
arises from cells lining the bile ducts. 
The most common symptoms of any
liver cancer are loss of appetite, weight
loss, lethargy, and sometimes pain in the
upper right abdomen. The later stages of
the disease are marked by  jaundice and
ascites (excess fluid in the abdomen).
Tumours are often detected by ultrasound
scanning, and diagnosis may be con-
firmed by  liver biopsy. A hepatoma can
sometimes be cured by complete re-
moval. In other cases, anticancer drugs
can help to slow the progress of the dis-
ease. It is usually not possible to cure
secondary liver cancer, but anticancer
drugs or, in some cases, removal of a
solitary metastasis may be advised.
liver, cirrhosis of See cirrhosis.
liver disease, alcoholic Damage to the
liver caused by excessive  alcohol con-
sumption. The longer consumption goes
on, the more severe the damage. The ini-
tial effect is the formation of fat globules
between liver cells, a condition called
fatty liver. This is followed by alcoholic
hepatitis, and damage then progresses to
cirrhosis. Alcohol-related liver disease
increases the risk of developing  liver
cancer. Liver function tests show a char-
acteristic pattern of abnormalities, and
liver biopsy may be needed to assess the
severity of damage. There is no particular
treatment, but abstinence from alcohol
prevents further damage. Treatment for
alcohol dependence may be required.
liver, disorders of The  liver is a com-
mon site of disease. The most significant
liver conditions include alcohol-related
disorders (see  liver disease,alcoholic),
hepatitis, and  liver cancer. Disorders can
also result from infection. Certain virus-
es cause hepatitis (see  hepatitis, viral).
Bacteria may spread up the biliary sys-
tem to the liver, causing  cholangitis or
liver abscess. Parasitic diseases affecting
the liver include schistosomiasis,  liver
fluke, and hydatid disease. Certain meta-
bolic disorders, such as haemochromatosis
and  Wilson＊sdisease, may involve the
liver. Other types of liver disorder include
Budd每Chiarisyndrome, in which the veins
draining the liver become blocked. Occa-
sionally, defects of liver structure are
present at birth. Such defects principally
affect the bile ducts; one example is bil-
iary atresia, in which the bile ducts are
absent. Because the liver breaks down
drugs and toxins, damage to liver cells
can also be caused through overdose or
drug allergy. (See also  jaundice; liver
failure; portal hypertension.)
liver failure Severe impairment of liver
function that develops suddenly or at the
final stages of a chronic liver disease.
Because the liver breaks down toxins in
the blood, liver failure causes the levels
of the toxins to rise, affecting the function-
ing of other organs, particularly the brain.
Liver failure may be acute or chronic.
Symptoms of acute liver failure develop
rapidly and include impaired memory,
agitation, and confusion, followed by
drowsiness. The functioning of other
organs may become impaired, and the
condition may lead to coma and death.
Features of chronic liver failure develop
much more gradually and include  jaun-
dice, itching, easy bruising and bleeding,
a swollen abdomen due to accumulated
fluid, red palms and, in males, gynaeco-
mastia (enlarged breasts)and shrunken
testes. Chronic liver failure may sudden-
ly deteriorate into acute liver failure.
Acute liver failure requires urgent hos-
pital care. Although no treatment can
repair damage that has already occurred
in acute and chronic liver failure, certain
measures, such as prescribing  diuretic
drugs to reduce abdominal swelling, may
be taken to reduce the severity of symp-
toms. Consumption of alcohol should
cease in all cases. The prognoses for
sufferers of chronic liver failure vary
depending on the cause, but some peo-
ple survive for many years. For acute
liver failure, a  liver transplant is neces-
sary to increase the chances of survival.
liver fluke Any of various species of flukes
(flatworms) that infest the bile ducts in
the liver. The only significant fluke in the
UK is  FASCIOLA HEPATICA,  which causes
the disease fascioliasis.
Fascioliasis has 2 stages. During the
first stage, young flukes migrate through
the liver, causing it to become tender
and enlarged; other symptoms include
LIVER, CIRRHOSIS OF LIVER FLUKE
L345
fever and night sweats. In the  second
stage, adult worms occupy the bile ducts.
Their presence may lead to  cholangitis
and bile duct obstruction, which can
cause jaundice. Treatment with an anthel-
mintic drug may be effective. 
liver function tests Tests of blood
chemistry that can detect changes in the
way the  liver is making new substances
and breaking down and/or excreting old
ones. The tests can also show whether
liver cells are healthy or being damaged.
liver imaging Techniques that produce
images of the liver, gallbladder, bile ducts,
and blood vessels supplying the liver, to
aid the detection of disease. Ultrasound
scanning, CT scanning, and MRI are com-
monly used. Radionuclide scanning may
reveal cysts and tumours and show bile
excretion.  X每ray techniques include
cholangiography, cholecystography, and
ERCP (endoscopic retrograde cholangio-
pancreatography). In these procedures,
a  contrast medium, which is opaque to
X-rays, is introduced to show abnormal-
ities in the biliary system. Angiography
reveals the blood vessels in the liver.
liver transplant Replacement of a dis-
eased liver with a healthy liver removed
from a donor. Liver transplants are most
successful in the treatment of advanced
liver  cirrhosis in people with chronic
active  hepatitis  or primary  biliary cirr-
hosis. People who have primary liver
cancer are rarely considered for trans-
plantation because there is a high risk
that the tumour will recur.
During this procedure, the liver,  gall-
bladder, and portions of the connected
blood and bile vessels are removed. The
donor organs and vessels are connected
to the recipient＊s vessels. After the trans-
plant, the recipient is monitored in an
intensive care unit for a few days and
remains in hospital for up to 4 weeks.
living will A written declaration, signed
by an adult of sound mind, that instructs
the person＊s doctor to withhold or with-
draw life-sustaining treatment if he or
she suffers from an incurable and termi-
nal condition. In the UK, such a document
has no legal force, but doctors will nor-
mally respect patients＊ wishes.
lobe One of the clearly defined parts
into which certain organs, such as the
brain, liver, and lungs, are divided. The
term may also be used to describe any
projecting, flat, pendulous part of the
body, such as the earlobe.
lobectomy An operation performed to
cut out a  lobe in the liver (see hepatec-
tomy, partial), lung (see lobectomy, lung),
or thyroid gland (see thyroidectomy).
lobectomy, lung An operation to cut
out one of the lobes of a lung, usually to
remove a cancerous tumour.
lobotomy, prefrontal Cutting of some
of the fibres linking the frontal lobes to
the rest of the brain. This operation was
formerly used to treat severe psychiatric
disorders; it is very rarely performed now.
lochia The discharge, after childbirth, of
blood and fragments of uterine lining
from the area where the  placenta was
attached. The discharge is bright red for
the first 3 or 4 days and then becomes
paler. The amount of lochia decreases as
the placental site heals, and discharge
usually ceases within 6 weeks.
locked knee A temporary inability to
move the knee joint. A locked knee may
be caused by a torn cartilage or by loose
bodies in the joint.
lockjaw A painful spasm of the jaw
muscles that makes it difficult or impos-
sible to open the mouth. Lockjaw is the
most common symptom of tetanus.
locomotor Relating to movement of
the extremities, as in locomotor ataxia.
lofepramine A  tricyclicantidepressant
drug that is used in the long-term treat-
ment of depression.
LOFEPRAMINE LIVER FUNCTION TESTS
L
LIVER TRANSPLANT
SITE OF
INCISION
Transplanted
gallbladder
Transplanted
liver
Recipient＊s
aorta
Bile
duct
Donor＊s 
blood vessels
Recipient＊s blood vessels346
loiasis A form of the tropical parasitic
disease  filariasis, which is caused by an
infestation by the worm  LOA LOA. The
worms travel beneath the skin, produc-
ing itchy areas of inflammation known as
Calabar swellings, and can sometimes
be seen moving across the front of the
eye. Loiasis is treated with a course of
diethylcarbamazine.
loin The part of the back on each side of
the spine between the lowest pair of ribs
and the top of the pelvis.
longsightedness See hypermetropia.
loose bodies Fragments of bone, carti-
lage, or capsule linings within a  joint.
Loose bodies may occur whenever there
is damage to a joint, as in injury, osteo-
arthritis, or osteochondritis dissecans. The
fragments can cause a joint to  lock,
resulting in severe pain. Gentle manipu-
lation may be required to unlock the
joint. If locking occurs frequently, the
loose bodies may be removed during
arthroscopy or by surgery.
loperamide An antidiarrhoeal drug. Lop-
eramide occasionally produces a rash.
Other rare adverse effects are fever,
abdominal cramps, and bloating.
loratadine An antihistamine drug.
lorazepam A benzodiazepine drug used
in the treatment of insomnia and anxiety.
lordosis Inward curvature of the  spine.
This curvature is normally present to a
minor degree in the lower back, but lor-
dosis can become exaggerated by poor
posture or by  kyphosis higher in the
back. Pronounced lordosis is usually
permanent and can lead to  disc pro-
lapse or osteoarthritis of the spine.
losartan An  angiotensin II antagonist
drug used to treat  hypertension (high
blood pressure). Side effects are usually
mild; they include dizziness and fatigue.
lotion A liquid drug preparation applied
to the skin. Some examples of drugs
prepared as a lotion include  calamine
and  betamethasone, which are used to
treat skin inflammation.
Lou Gehrig＊s disease The most com-
mon type of motor neuron disease; also
known as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
low density lipoprotein One of a group
of proteins that are combined with lipids
in the plasma. Low density lipoproteins
(LDLs) are involved in the transport of
cholesterol in the bloodstream. An excess
of LDLs (see hyperlipidaemias) is asso-
ciated with  atherosclerosis. (See also
high density lipoprotein.)
LSD Abbreviation of lysergic acid diethy-
lamide:a synthetic hallucinogenic drug,
derived from ergot, that is used illegally
as a recreational drug. LSD sometimes
produces panic and physical side effects
such as nausea and dizziness. 
Ludwig＊s angina A rare bacterial in-
fection of the floor of the mouth. The
condition spreads to the throat, causing
life-threatening swelling. It requires im-
mediate treatment with antibioticdrugs.
lumbago A general term for low  back
pain. Lumbago may be due to an inter-
vertebral disc prolapse. It may also arise
if synovium is trapped between the sur-
faces of a small intervertebral joint, or if
there is momentary partial dislocation
of an intervertebral joint with straining of
ligaments. However, in many cases no
cause is found. Treatment is with anal-
gesic drugs and gentle physical activity.
(See also lumbosacralspasm.)
lumbar Relating to the part of the back
between the lowest ribs and the top of
the pelvis. The lumbar region of the spine
consists of the 5 lumbar vertebrae.
lumbar puncture A procedure in which
a hollow needle is inserted into the lower
part of the spinal canal to withdraw
cerebrospinal fluid or to inject drugs or
LOIASIS LUMBAR PUNCTURE
L
LUMBAR PUNCTURE
Needle
Vertebra
Cerebrospinal
fluid
Needle
Doctor
Spinal cord
SITE OF INSERTIONother substances. Lumbar puncture is
usually carried out to collect a sample
of cerebrospinal fluid in order to diag-
nose and investigate disorders of the
brain and spinal cord (such as meningi-
tis and subarachnoid haemorrhage). The
procedure takes about 15 minutes and
is carried out under local anaesthesia.
lumbosacral spasm Excessive tight-
ening of the muscles that surround and
support the lower region of the  spine,
causing back pain. Treatment of lumbo-
sacral spasm may include analgesic drugs
and muscle-relaxant drugs.
lumen The space within a tubular organ,
such as the intestine.
lumpectomy A surgical treatment for
breast cancer in which only the cancerous
tissue is removed. (See also  mastec-
tomy; quadrantectomy.)
lunacy An outdated term for serious
mental disorder.
lung One of the 2 main organs of the
respiratorysystem. The lungs supply the
body with the oxygen needed for aero-
bic metabolism and eliminate the waste
product carbon dioxide. Air is delivered
to the lungs via the trachea (windpipe);
this branches into 2 main bronchi (air
passages), with 1  bronchus supplying
each lung. The main bronchi divide again
into smaller bronchi and then into bron-
chioles, which lead to air passages that
open out into grape-like air sacs called
alveoli (see  alveolus, pulmonary). Oxy-
gen and carbon dioxide diffuse into or
out of the blood through the thin walls
of the alveoli. Each lung is enclosed in a
double membrane called the pleura; the
two layers of the pleura secrete a lubri-
cating fluid that enables the lungs to
move freely as they expand and contract
during breathing. (See also respiration.) 
lung cancer The most common form of
cancer in the UK. Tobacco-smoking is
the main cause. Passive smoking (the
inhalation of tobacco smoke by non-
smokers) and environmental pollution
(for example, with radioactive minerals
or asbestos) are also risk factors. 
The first and most common symptom is
a cough. Other symptoms include cough-
ing up blood, shortness of breath, and
chest pain. Lung cancer can spread to
other parts of the body, especially the
liver, brain, and bones. In most cases,
the cancer is revealed in a chest X-ray.
To confirm the diagnosis, tissue must be
examined microscopically for the pres-
ence of cancerous cells (see cytology). If
lung cancer is diagnosed at an early
stage,  pneumonectomy (removal of the
lung) or  lobectomy (removal of part of
the lung) may be possible.  Anticancer
drugs and radiotherapy may also be used.
lung, collapse of See atelectasis;pneu-
mothorax.
lung disease, chronic obstructive See
pulmonary disease, chronic obstructive.
lung, disorders of The most common
lung disorders are infections. These dis-
eases  include pneumonia, tracheitis, and
croup. Bronchitis and bronchiolitis, which
are inflammatory disorders affecting the
airways within the lungs, can be compli-
cations of colds or influenza. The disorder
bronchiectasis may occur as a complica-
tion of severe bacterial pneumonia or
LUNG, DISORDERS OF LUMBOSACRAL SPASM
L
Pleura
Lobe Bronchus
Trachea
LOCATION
LUNG
ALVEOLI
Bronchiole
Air space
Blood
vessel
Thin wall
of alveolus
Left lung
Right lung
347348
cystic fibrosis. The lungs can also be
affected by allergic disorders. The most
important of these is  asthma. Another
such disorder is allergic alveolitis, which
is usually a reaction to dust of plant or
animal origin. Irritation of the airways,
usually by tobacco-smoking, can cause
diseases characterized by damage to
lung tissue and narrowing of the airways
(see pulmonary disease, chronic obstruc-
tive). The lungs can also be affected by
cancerous tumours;  lung cancer is one
of the most common cancers. Non-
cancerous lung tumours are uncommon.
Injury to a lung, usually resulting from
penetration of the chest wall, can cause
the lung to collapse (see pneumothorax;
haemothorax). Damage to the interior of
the lungs can be caused by inhalation
of toxic substances (see asbestosis; sili-
cosis). Blood supply to the lungs may be
reduced by pulmonary embolism. 
Lung disorders can be investigated in
various ways, such as chest X-ray, bron-
choscopy,and pulmonary functiontests.
lung function tests See pulmonary func-
tion tests.
lung imaging Techniques that provide
images of the  lungs to aid in the diag-
nosis of disease. Most  lung disorders
can be detected by chest X-ray. CT scan-
ning and MRI play an important role in
detecting the presence and spread of
lung tumours.  Ultrasound scanning is
sometimes used to reveal  pleural effu-
sion.  Radioisotope scanning is used to
detect evidence of pulmonary embolism.
lung tumours Growths in the lungs.
These tumours may be either cancerous
(see lung cancer) or noncancerous. 
Cancerous lung tumours are usually
associated with tobacco-smoking. Non-
cancerous tumours occur less frequently
than cancers. The most common form
of noncancerous tumour is a bronchial
adenoma, which arises in the lining of a
bronchus. Adenomas often cause bron-
chial obstruction; affected people may
also cough up blood. Treatment involves
surgical removal of the tumour. Other
rare noncancerous tumours include fib-
romas (which consist of fibrous tissue)
and  lipomas (which consist of fatty tis-
sue). No treatment is necessary unless
the tumours are causing problems. 
lupus erythematosus An  autoimmune
disorder that causes inflammation of
connective tissue. The most common
type, discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE),
only affects exposed areas of the skin.
The more serious form,  systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), affects many body
systems, including the skin. 
In both varieties of lupus erythemato-
sus, the symptoms periodically subside
and recur with varying severity. In DLE,
the rash starts as one or more red, cir-
cular, thickened areas of skin that later
scar. These patches may occur on the
face, behind the ears, and on the scalp.
Treatment is usually with topical  corti-
costeroid drugs. SLE causes a variety of
symptoms. A characteristic red, blotchy,
butterfly-shaped rash may appear over
the cheeks and the bridge of the nose;
other symptoms include fatigue, fever,
loss of appetite, nausea, joint pain, and
weight loss. There may also be anaemia,
neurological or psychiatric problems,
kidney failure,  pleurisy, arthritis, and
pericarditis. Diagnosis is made by blood
tests and sometimes a skin biopsy.
Sufferers of mild forms of SLE may
have near normal health for many years;
treatment with corticosteroid drugs and
immunosuppressant drugs can improve
life expectancy. Other treatments are
available to treat specific features of the
disease. However, SLE is still a poten-
tially fatal disorder.  
lupus pernio Sarcoidosis affecting the
skin, in which purple, chilblain-like swell-
ings appear on the nose, cheeks, or ears.
lupus vulgaris A rare form of  tubercu-
losis affecting the skin, especially on the
head and neck. Painless, clear, red-brown
nodules appear and ulcerate; the ulcers
eventually heal, leaving deep scars.
luteinizing hormone Also known as
LH, a gonadotrophin hormone produced
by the pituitary gland.
luteinizing hormone-releasing hor-
mone A naturally occurring  hormone,
also known as LH-RH, that is released
by the  hypothalamus in the brain. This
hormone is also prepared synthetically
as a drug. Natural LH-RH stimulates
the release of gonadotrophin hormones
from the pituitary gland. Gonadotrophin
hormones control the production of
LUNG FUNCTION TESTSLUTEINIZING HORMONE
L349
oestrogen hormones and androgen hor-
mones. Synthetic LH-RH, also known as
synthetic  gonadorelin, is used to treat
delayed puberty, and to treat infertility
in women. LH-RH may cause headache,
nausea, hot flushes, vaginal dryness, and
irregular periods.
Lyme disease A disease caused by the
bacterium BORRELIA BURGDORFERI, which
is transmitted by the bite of a tick that
usually lives on deer. At the site of the
bite, a red dot may appear and gradually
expand into an area up to 5mm (
1
/ 4 in)
across. Symptoms including fever, head-
ache, and muscle pain usually develop;
these symptoms are followed by joint
inflammation, which typically affects the
knees and other large joints. 
Symptoms may vary in severity and
occur in cycles lasting a week or so. If
the disease is not treated, complications
including meningitis, facial palsy, and an
abnormal heartbeat (see  arrhythmia,
cardiac) may develop. The most serious
long-term complication is  arthritis. The
disease can be cleared up with antibiotic
drugs. Treatment is most effective when
given soon after the initial infection.
lymph A watery or milky body fluid con-
taining  lymphocytes, proteins, and fats.
Lymph accumulates outside the blood
vessels in the intercellular spaces of body
tissues, and is collected by the vessels of
the lymphatic system. This system filters
the fluid and eventually returns it to the
bloodstream. Lymph plays an important
role in the immune system as well as in
absorbing fats from the intestine.
lymphadenitis A medical term for in-
flammation of the  lymph nodes, which
is a common cause of  lymphadenopa-
thy (see glands, swollen).
lymphadenopathy The medical term for
swollen lymph nodes (see glands, swollen).
lymphangiography A diagnostic pro-
cedure that involves injecting a contrast
medium into lymph vessels (see  lym-
phatic system) so that these vessels and
lymph nodes, and any abnormalities,
can be seen on  X-ray film. Lymphan-
giography has largely been superseded
by CT scanning and MRI.
lymphangioma A rare, noncancerous
tumour of the skin or tongue consisting
of a mass of abnormal lymph vessels.
lymphangitis Inflammation of the lym-
phatic vessels (see  lymphatic system)
due to the spread of bacteria (commonly
streptococci) from an infected wound.
The inflammation causes tender red
streaks to appear on the skin overlying
the lymphatic vessels. These red streaks
extend from the infection site towards
the nearest  lymph nodes. The affected
nodes become swollen and tender, and
there is usually fever and a general feel-
ing of illness. Lymphangitis requires
urgent treatment with antibiotic drugs.
lymphatic system A system of vessels
(lymphatic vessels) that drains  lymph
from tissues all over the body back into
the bloodstream. The lymphatic system
is part of the  immune system and has a
major function in defending the body
against infection and cancer. This sys-
tem also plays a part in the absorption
of fats from the intestine.
All body tissues are bathed in lymph,
a watery fluid derived from the blood-
stream. Much of this fluid is returned to
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM LYME DISEASE
L
Lymphatic
vessel
Abdominal
lymph
nodes
Axillary
(armpit)
lymph
nodes
Thymus
Inguinal
(groin) lymph
nodes
Spleen
Chest
lymph
nodes
Cervical (neck)
lymph nodes
LYMPHATIC SYSTEMthe bloodstream through the walls of the
capillaries (see circulatory system), but
the remainder is transported to the heart
through the lymphatic system. 
Lymph is moved along the lymphatic
vessels during physical activity, as mus-
cle contractions compress the vessels;
valves inside the vessels ensure that the
lymph flows in the correct direction. Sit-
uated on the lymphatic vessels are lymph
nodes, through which the lymph passes.
These nodes filter the lymph and trap
infectious microorganisms or other for-
eign bodies. The nodes contain many
lymphocytes, white blood cells that can
neutralize or destroy invading bacteria
and viruses. The lymphatic system also
includes the  spleen and the  thymus,
which produce lymphocytes.
lymph gland A popular name for a
lymph node. (See also lymphatic system.)
lymph node A small organ lying along
the course of a lymphatic vessel (see
lymphatic system); commonly but incor-
rectly called a lymph gland. Lymph nodes
vary considerably in size, from  micro-
scopic to about 2.5cm (1in) in diameter.
A lymph node consists of a thin, fibrous
outer capsule and an inner mass of lym-
phoid tissue. Penetrating the capsule are
several small lymphatic vessels (which
carry lymph into the node). Each node
contains sinuses (spaces), in which the
lymph is filtered. The flow of the lymph
slows as it moves through narrow chan-
nels in the sinuses; this reduction in flow
allows macrophages (white blood cells
that engulf and destroy foreign and dead
material) time to filter microorganisms
from the lymph. Germinal centres in the
lymph node release white blood cells
called  lymphocytes, which also help to
fight infection. A single, larger vessel
carries lymph out of the node.
lymphocyte Any one of a group of white
blood cells that are of crucial impor-
tance to the immune system. There are 2
principal types of lymphocyte: B- and 
T-lymphocytes. B-lymphocytes produce
immunoglobulins or  antibodies, which
attach themselves to antigens (proteins)
on the surfaces of bacteria. This starts a
process leading to the destruction of the
bacteria. The T-lymphocytes comprise 3
main groups of cells: killer (cytotoxic)
cells, helper cells, and suppressor cells.
The killer T-lymphocytes attach to abnor-
mal cells (for example, tumour cells,
cells that have been invaded by viruses,
and those in transplanted tissue) and
release chemicals called lymphokines,
which help to destroy the abnormal
cells. Helper T-cells enhance the activi-
ties of the killer T-cells and the B-cells,
and also control other aspects of the
immune response. Suppressor T-cells act
to ※switch off§ the immune response.
Some lymphocytes do not participate
directly in immune responses, but serve
as a memory bank for antigens that
have been encountered.
lymphoedema An abnormal accumula-
tion of lymph in the tissues, which occurs
when the normal drainage of lymph is
disrupted (see  lymphatic system). There
are various causes. In the tropical dis-
ease filariasis, lymphatic vessels may be
blocked by parasitic worms. Cancer can
lead to lymphoedema if vessels become
blocked by deposits of cancer cells. Sur-
gical removal of lymph nodes under the
arm or in the groin, or  radiotherapy to
an area containing lymph nodes, may
also result in lymphoedema. Rarely, the
condition is due to a congenital abnor-
mality of the lymphatic vessels known
LYMPH GLAND LYMPHOEDEMA
L
Sinus
Incoming lymph
vessel
Macrophage
Outer
capsule
Artery
Vein Outgoing
lymph vessel
Germinal
centre
Valve
LYMPH NODE
350351
as Milroy＊s disease. In addition, the dis-
order may occur for no known cause. 
Lymphoedema may develop in the arm
following a radical mastectomy. Other-
wise, it usually causes swelling of the
legs, to an incapacitating degree in some
people. There is no known cure. Treat-
ment consists of taking  diuretic drugs,
massage, wearing an elastic bandage or
compression sleeve, and special exer-
cises; these measures may bring about
some improvement. 
lymphogranuloma venereum A sex-
ually transmitted disease  caused by a
chlamydial infection; it is most common
in tropical areas. The first sign of this
condition may be a small genital blister
that heals in a few days. There may also
be fever, headache, muscle and joint
pains, and a rash. The lymph nodes, par-
ticularly in the groin, become painfully
enlarged and inflamed. Abscesses may
form, and persistent ulcers may develop,
on the skin over the affected glands.
Treatment is with antibiotic drugs.
lymphoma Any of a group of cancers in
which the cells of lymphoid tissue (found
principally in the  lymph nodes and the
spleen) multiply unchecked. Lymphomas
fall into 2 categories. If certain charac-
teristic abnormal cells (Reed每Sternberg
cells) are present, the disease is called
Hodgkin＊s disease. All other forms are
known as non-Hodgkin＊s lymphoma.
(See Burkitt＊s lymphoma; Hodgkin＊s dis-
ease; lymphoma, non-Hodgkin＊s.)
lymphoma, non-Hodgkin＊s Any can-
cer of lymphoid tissue (found mainly in
the lymph nodes and spleen) other than
Hodgkin＊s disease. In most cases there
is no known cause. Occasionally, the
disease is associated with suppression
of the  immune system, particularly after
an organ transplant. One type of non-
Hodgkin＊s lymphoma, known as Burkitt＊s
lymphoma, is thought to be caused by
the Epstein每Barr virus. 
There is usually painless swelling of
lymph nodes in the neck or groin. The
liver and  spleen may enlarge, and lym-
phoid tissue in the abdomen may be
affected. Many other organs may become
involved, leading to diverse symptoms
ranging from headache to skin ulcera-
tion. Unless it is controlled, the disease
(often marked by fever) progressively
impairs the immune system, leading to
death from infections or an uncontrolled
spread of cancer. Diagnosis is based on
a  biopsy, usually taken from a lymph
node.  Chest X-ray, CT scanning, MRI,
bone marrow biopsy, and  lymphangiog-
raphy of the abdomen may be needed
to assess the extent of the disease. 
If the lymphoma is confined to a single
group of lymph nodes, treatment con-
sists of  radiotherapy. More often, the
disease is more extensive, and in such
cases anticancer drugs are given. A bone
marrow transplant, together with drug
treatment and/or radiotherapy, may be
performed on some people.
lymphosarcoma The former name for
a condition that is now classified as a
type of non-Hodgkin＊s lymphoma (see
lymphoma,non-Hodgkin＊s).
lysergide see LSD.
lysis A medical term for breaking down 
or destruction, usually applied to the
destruction of cells by disintegration of
their outer membrane. A common ex-
ample is  haemolysis, the breakdown of
red blood cells. Lysis may be caused 
by chemical action, such as that of an
enzyme, or by physical action, such as
that of heat or cold. The term lysis is
also occasionally used to refer to a sud-
den recovery from a fever.
lysozyme An  enzyme found in tears,
saliva, sweat, nasal secretions, breast
milk, and many tissues. It destroys bac-
teria by disrupting their cell walls.
LYSOZYME LYMPHOGRANULOMA VENEREUM
L352
macro- A prefix meaning large, as in
macrophage (a large cell in the immune
system) or macroglossia.
macrobiotics A dietary system in which
foods with a balance of  yin and yang
are eaten. Foods are classified as yin or
yang depending on factors such as
their colour, texture, and taste.
macroglossia Abnormal enlargement of
the tongue. Macroglossia is a feature 
of  Down＊s syndrome,  hypothyroidism,
and  acromegaly.It is also caused by
some tumours of the tongue, such as a
haemangioma or a lymphangioma.
macrolide drugs A class of  antibiotic
drugs used to treat a wide range of infec-
tions including those of the ear, nose,
throat, respiratory and gastrointestinal
tracts, and skin. Common macrolides
include azithromycin and erythromycin.
macrophage A cell in the  immunesys-
tem. Macrophages are large phagocytes,
which can engulf and destroy micro-
organisms and other foreign particles.
They are found in most body tissues. 
macula The area of the eye＊s  retina
responsible for seeing fine detail. The
macula surrounds the fovea, which con-
tains the highest density of visual cells.
macular degeneration A progressive,
painless disorder affecting the macula.
The result is a roughly circular area of
blindness that increases in size until it
is large enough to obscure 2 or 3 words
at reading distance. Macular degenera-
tion does not cause total blindness as
vision is retained around the edges of
the visual fields. This condition is a
common disorder in elderly people.
Of the 2 types of macular degenera-
tion that may occur, one type is usually
remedied by laser treatment. There is no
treatment for the other form, although
the affected person may benefit from
aids such as magnifying instruments. 
macule A spot that is level with the
skin＊s surface and discernible only by
difference in colour or texture.
mad cow disease The commonly used
name for  bovinespongiformenceph-
alopathy (BSE). 
magnesium An element essential in
the diet for the formation of bones and
teeth, muscle contraction, nerve impulse
transmission, and activation of many
enzymes. Dietary sources include cere-
als, nuts, soya beans, milk, and fish.
magnesium sulphate A magnesium
compound used as a  laxative drug and
an anticonvulsant drug.
magnesium trisilicate A magnesium
compound used in antacid drugs.
magnetic resonance imaging See
MRI.
malabsorption Impaired absorption of
nutrients by the lining of the small
intestine. Malabsorption may be caused
by many conditions, including  lactase
deficiency,  cystic fibrosis, chronic  pan-
creatitis, coeliac disease, Crohn＊s disease,
amyloidosis,  giardiasis,  Whipple＊s dis-
ease, and  lymphoma. The removal of
some of the small intestine, and certain
operations on the stomach, may also
result in malabsorption.
Common symptoms are diarrhoea and
weight loss; and in severe cases, there
may also be malnutrition (see nutritional
disorders),  vitamin  deficiency,  mineral
deficiency, or  anaemia. Diagnosis may
be made by tests on faeces, blood tests,
barium X-ray examination and  jejunal
biopsy. In most cases, dietary modifica-
tions or supplements are successful in
MACRO- MALABSORPTION
M
MACULA
Retina
Optic
nerve Cornea
Fovea
Lens Macula
M
Iris353
treating the disorder. In severe cases,
intravenous infusion of nutrients is
needed (see feeding, artificial).
maladjustment Failure to adapt to a
change in one＊s environment, resulting
in inability to cope with work or social
activities. Maladjustment can occur as a
reaction to stressful situations, such as
divorce or moving house. There may be
feelings of  depression or  anxiety, or
behavioural problems in children and in
adolescents. Maladjustment usually dis-
appears when a person is removed from
the stressful situation or adapts to it.
malaise A vague feeling of being unwell.
malalignment Positioning of  teeth in
the  jaw so that they do not form a
smooth arch shape when viewed from
above or below (see malocclusion).
Malalignment may also refer to a
fracture in which the bone ends are 
not in a straight line. 
malar flush A high colour over the
cheekbones, with a bluish tinge caused
by reduced oxygen concentration in the
blood. Malar flush is considered to be a
sign of mitral stenosis, which often fol-
lows  rheumatic fever. However, malar
flush is not always present in mitral
stenosis, and many people with this
colouring do not have heart disease. 
malaria A serious disease caused by
parasitic  protozoa called plasmodia.
The infection is spread by the bite of
anopheles mosquitoes and is prevalent
throughout the tropics. Malaria causes
severe fever, and, in some cases, fatal
complications affecting the kidneys,
liver, brain, and blood. 
There are 4 species of plasmodia that
cause malaria: PLASMODIUM FALCIPARUM,
PLASMODIUM VIVAX,  PLASMODIUM OVALE,
and  PLASMODIUMMALARIAE. When a
mosquito carrying any of these species
bites a human, the plasmodia enter the
bloodstream. They invade the liver and
red blood cells, where they multiply. 
The red cells then rupture, releasing the
new parasites. Some of them infect new
red cells, and the others develop into
forms that can infect more mosquitoes.
Falciparum malaria infects more red
cells than the other species and there-
fore causes a more serious infection.
Most cases of this form occur in Africa.
Symptoms of malaria include fever,
shaking, and chills. There may also be
severe headache, general malaise, and
vomiting. The fever often develops in
cycles, occurring every other day (in
vivax and ovale infections) or every 3rd
day (in malariae infections).
Falciparum malaria can be fatal within
days. Infected red cells become sticky
and block blood vessels in vital organs.
The  spleen becomes enlarged and the
brain may be affected, leading to coma
and convulsions. Destruction of blood
cells causes haemolytic anaemia (see
anaemia, haemolytic). Kidney failure and
jaundice often occur. 
A diagnosis is made by examining a
blood sample under a microscope to
view the parasites.  Chloroquine is the
usual treatment for species other than
falciparum. Falciparum malaria is treat-
ed with  quinine,  mefloquine, or with
proguanil and atovaquone. People with
vivax or ovale malaria must also take
the drug  primaquine. In severe cases,
blood transfusions may be needed.
Preventive antimalarial drugs should
be taken by all visitors to malarial coun-
tries. Doctors should be consulted for
up-to-date advice on the choice and
dosages of drugs to be taken.
malathion An antiparasitic drug, which
is used to treat skin or hair infestations
such as lice and scabies.
malformation A deformity, particularly
one resulting from faulty development. 
malignant A condition that tends to be-
come progressively worse and to result
in death. The term is primarily used to
refer to a cancerous tumour that spreads
from its original location to form second-
ary tumours in other parts of the body. 
malignant melanoma See melanoma,
malignant.
malingering The deliberate simulation
of symptoms for a purpose, such as
taking time off work or obtaining com-
pensation. Malingering is different from
factitious disorders and hypochondriasis,
in which symptoms are not under the
individual＊s voluntary control.
mallet finger Injury to the tendon or
bone in a fingertip that forces the tip into
a bent position. A common sports injury,
it occurs when a ball strikes a finger.
MALLET FINGER MALADJUSTMENT
M354
Treatment is with a splint or with tem-
porary insertion of wire through the
bones to hold the finger straight. The
injury heals within 2每3 months.
mallet toe See claw-toe.
malleus One of the 3 tiny bones (known
collectively as the auditory ossicles)
that are situated in the middle ear. 
The malleus, together with the  incus
and the  stapes, transmits sound vibra-
tions from the eardrum to the inner ear. 
Mallory每Weiss syndrome A tear at
the lower end of the oesophagus, caus-
ing vomiting of blood. The syndrome is
commonly caused by retching and vom-
iting after drinking excessive amounts
of alcohol. Less often, violent coughing,
a severe asthma attack, or epileptic
convulsions may be the cause. 
An  endoscope is passed down the
oesophagus to confirm the diagnosis.
The tear generally heals within 10 days
and no special treatment is usually
required. However, a  blood transfusion
may sometimes be necessary.
malnutrition See nutritional disorders.
malocclusion An abnormal relation-
ship between the upper and lower sets
of  teeth when they are closed, affecting
the bite (see occlusion) or appearance. 
Malocclusion usually develops during
childhood. It is inherited, or is caused by
thumb-sucking or a mismatch between
the teeth and jaws 每 for example, the
combination of large teeth and a small
mouth (see overcrowding, dental).
Orthodontic appliances (braces) may
be used to move teeth into the proper
position, and if there is dental over-
crowding, some teeth may be extracted.
Orthognathic surgery is used to treat
severe recession or protrusion of the
lower jaw. Treatment is best carried out
in childhood or adolescence. 
malpresentation A condition in which
a baby is not in the usual head-first
position for childbirth. Malpresentation
includes breech presentation (in which
the baby＊s bottom appears first), face
presentation, and shoulder presenta-
tion (in which the baby is lying across
the uterus). Breech presentations are
the most common. A breech baby may
be born by breech delivery or caesarean
section. A shoulder presentation baby
usually requires a caesarean section.
malta fever Older term for brucellosis.
mammary gland See breast.
mammography An X-ray procedure for
examination of the breast. The breast is
gently flattened between an X-ray plate
and a plastic cover so that as much tis-
sue as possible can be imaged. The
procedure is used to investigate breast
lumps, and to screen for breast cancer,
because it allows the detection of
MALLET TOE MAMMOGRAPHY
M
MAMMOGRAPHY
Plastic
cover
X-ray beam
Plastic cover
Mammography
technician
DETAIL
Compressed
breast
X-ray
plate
X-ray machine355
breast tumours too small to be found
during a physical examination (see
breast self-examination).
mammoplasty A cosmetic operation to
make large or pendulous breasts smal-
ler (breast reduction), to enlarge small
breasts (breast enlargement), or to
reconstruct a breast following surgery
for breast cancer.
In breast reduction, unwanted tissue
is removed and the breast is raised to
correct drooping. Breast enlargement
involves the insertion of an implant
under the skin. Breast reconstruction
may be carried out at the same time as
a mastectomy. The normal contours of
the breast are restored by the insertion
of an implant. Possible complications of
mammoplasty include leakage from the
implant, hardening of the surrounding
breast tissue, and scarring.
mandible The lower jaw.
mania A mental disorder characterized
by episodes of overactivity, elation, or
irritability. Mania usually occurs as part
of a manic每depressive illness. 
Symptoms may include extravagant
spending, repeatedly starting new tasks;
sleeping less; increased appetite for
food, alcohol, sex, and exercise; out-
bursts of inappropriate anger, laughter,
or sudden socializing; and delusions of
grandeur. If symptoms are mild, the
condition is called hypomania.
Severe mania usually needs treatment
in hospital with  antipsychotic drugs.
Relapses may be prevented by taking
lithium or carbamazepine.
manic每depressive illness A mental
disorder that is characterized by a dis-
turbance of mood. The disturbance may
be unipolar (consisting of either depres-
sion or  mania) or bipolar (swinging
between the two). In a severe form that
is sometimes referred to as manic每
depressive psychosis, there may also be
grandiose ideas or negative delusions.
Abnormalities in brain biochemistry,
or in the structure and/or function of 
certain nerve pathways within the brain,
could underlie manic每depressive ill-
ness. An inherited tendency is also an
established causative factor.
Severe manic每depressive illness often
needs hospital treatment. Antidepressant
drugs and/or  ECT are used to treat
depression, and antipsychotic drugs are
given to control manic symptoms. Car-
bamazepine or  lithium may be used to
prevent relapse.
Group therapy,  family therapy, and
individual psychotherapy may be useful 
in treatment. Cognitive每behavioural ther-
apy may also be helpful.With treatment,
more than 80 per cent of patients im-
prove or remain stable. Even those with
severe illness may be restored to near
normal health with lithium.
manipulation A therapeutic technique
involving the skilful use of the hands to
move a part of the body, joint, or muscle
to treat certain disorders. Manipulation
is important in  orthopaedics,  physio-
therapy, osteopathy, and chiropractic.
Manipulation may be used to treat
deformity and stiffness caused by bone
and joint disorders, to realign bones in
a displaced  fracture, to reposition a
joint after a  dislocation, or to stretch a
contracture. Occasionally, manipulation
is used to help treat frozen shoulder. 
mannitol An osmotic diuretic drug used to
treat oedema of the brain and glaucoma.
manometry The measuring of pressure
(of either a liquid or a gas) by means of
an instrument called a manometer.
Manometry is used to measure blood
pressure using an instrument called a
sphygmomanometer.
mantoux test A skin test for tubercu-
losis (see tuberculin tests). 
manubrium The uppermost part of the
sternum (breastbone).
MAOI An abbreviation for  monoamine
oxidase inhibitor drugs.
marasmus A severe form of protein and
calorie malnutrition that usually occurs
in famine or semi-starvation conditions.
Marasmus is common in young children
in developing countries. The disorder
causes stunted growth, emaciation, and
loose folds of skin on the limbs and
buttocks due to loss of muscle and fat.
Other signs include sparse, brittle hair;
diarrhoea; and dehydration.
Treatment includes keeping the child
warm and giving a high-energy, protein-
rich diet. Persistent marasmus can cause
mental handicap and impaired growth.
(See also kwashiorkor.)
MARASMUS MAMMOPLASTY
M356
marble bone disease See osteopetrosis.
march fracture A break in one of the
metatarsal bones (the long bones in 
the foot) that is caused by running or
walking for long distances on a hard
surface. The fracture results in pain,
tenderness, and swelling. However, it
may not show on  X-rays until callus
(new bone) starts to form. Treatment for
a march fracture is rest and, occasion-
ally, immobilization in a plaster  cast.
(See also stress fracture.)
Marfan＊s syndrome A rare genetic dis-
order of  connective tissue (material 
that holds body structures together)
that results in skeletal, heart, and eye
abnormalities. Features of Marfan＊s syn-
drome usually appear after age 10.
Affected people are very tall and thin,
with long, spidery fingers and weak liga-
ments and tendons. The chest and
spine are often deformed and the lens
of the eye may be dislocated. The heart
or aorta is often abnormal.
marijuana The flowering tops and dried
leaves of the Indian hemp plant CANNABIS
SATIVA, containing the active ingredient
THC (tetra-hydrocannabinol). The leaves
are usually smoked but can be drunk as
tea or eaten in food. Physical effects of
marijuana include dry mouth, mild red-
dening of the eyes, slight clumsiness,
and an increased
appetite. The main
subjective feelings
are usually of calm-
ness and wellbeing,
but depression oc-
curs occasionally.
Large doses may
cause panic, fear of
death, and illusions.
In rare cases, true
psychosis occurs,
with paranoid de-
lusions, confusion,
and other symp-
toms, which usually
disappear within a few days. Regular
use of marijuana may lead to a more
permanent state of apathy and loss of
concern (a condition that is known as
amotivational syndrome).
marriage guidance See  relationship
counselling. 
marrow, bone See bone marrow.
marsupialization A surgical procedure
used to drain some types of abscess or
cyst and to prevent further abscesses.
Marsupialization is used to treat certain
types of cysts affecting the pancreas and
liver, and cysts affecting the Bartholin＊s
glands at the entrance to the vagina.
masculinization See virilization.
masochism A chronic desire to be phys-
ically, mentally, or emotionally abused.
The term masochism is used to refer to
the achievement of sexual excitement
by means of one＊s own suffering through
activities such as bondage, flagellation,
and verbal abuse. (See also  sadism;
sadomasochism.)
massage Rubbing and kneading areas
of the body, usually with the hands.
Massage increases the blood flow and
relaxes muscles; it may be used to re-
lieve muscle spasm, treat muscle injury,
and reduce oedema. Although massage
is most effective when carried out by
someone else, self-massage can allevi-
ate pain caused by muscle tension.
mastalgia The medical term for pain in
the breast.
mast cell A type of cell that plays an
important part in allergy. In an allergic
response, mast cells release histamine.
mastectomy The surgical removal of all
of the breast, usually performed to treat
breast cancer. Mastectomy may be used
for extensive breast cancer or for multi-
ple cancerous tumours. For smaller
cancers, lumpectomy or quadrantectomy
may be appropriate. 
A mastectomy involves the removal of
all of the breast tissue and usually
some or all of the  lymph nodes in the
armpit. Cells from the lymph nodes are
examined to determine whether can-
cerous cells may have spread. The
operation is performed under general
anaesthesia and usually requires a stay
in hospital of several days.  Plastic
surgery to reconstruct the breast may
be carried out at the same time as the
mastectomy or at a later time (see
mammoplasty).
Treatment with  radiotherapy is often
given after surgery, especially if the 
cancer has spread to lymph nodes. It
usually starts a month after surgery and
MARBLE BONE DISEASE MASTECTOMY
M
MARIJUANA
MARIJUANA LEAF357
is continued for 6 weeks. Drug treat-
ment with  tamoxifen  or  chemotherapy
may also be given.
mastication The process of chewing
food. The canines and incisors (front
teeth) shear the food. The tongue then
pushes it between the upper and lower
premolars and molars (back teeth) to be
ground by movements of the lower jaw.
Saliva is mixed with the food to help
break it down for swallowing. 
mastitis Inflammation of breast tissue,
usually caused by bacterial infection
and sometimes by hormonal changes.
Mastitis usually occurs when bacteria
enter the nipple during breast-feeding. It
can also be caused by changes in levels
of sex hormones in the body 每 for exam-
ple, at the onset of puberty. 
Mastitis results in pain, tenderness,
and swelling in one or both breasts.
Bacterial mastitis during breast-feeding
also causes redness and  engorgement
and may result in a breast abscess. 
Mastitis caused by infection is treated
with  antibiotic drugs  and  analgesic
drugs, and by expressing milk to relieve
engorgement. Mastitis caused by hor-
mone changes usually clears up in a few
weeks without treatment.
mastocytosis An unusual condition in
which itchy, irregular, yellow or orange-
brown swellings occur on the skin, most
commonly on the trunk. Mastocytosis
may also affect body organs, including
the liver, spleen, and intestine, and it
may cause symptoms such as diarrhoea,
vomiting, and fainting. Very rarely, the
condition leads to
anaphylactic shock,
which can be fatal.
The condition usu-
ally begins in the 1st
year of life and clears
up by adolescence.
Antihistamine drugs
may be helpful in
relieving symptoms
ofmastocytosis.
mastoid bone The
lower part of the
temporal bone in
the  skull. It has a
projection, known
as the mastoid pro-
cess, which can be felt behind the ear.
The mastoid bone is honeycombed with
air cells. These are connected to a cavity
called the mastoid antrum, which leads
into the middle ear. Infections of the
middle ear (see  otitis media) occasion-
ally spread through the mastoid bone
to cause acute mastoiditis.
mastoiditis Inflammation of the mastoid
bone in the skull. The disease is caused
by infection spreading from the middle
ear (see otitis media) to the air cells in
the mastoid bone through a cavity
called the mastoid antrum.
Mastoiditis causes earache and severe
pain, swelling, and tenderness behind
the ear. There is usually also fever, a
creamy discharge from the ear, progres-
sive hearing loss, and displacement of
the outer ear. If the infection spreads, it
may lead to meningitis, a brain abscess,
blood clotting in veins within the brain,
or facial palsy.
Treatment is with  antibiotic drugs. If
the infection persists, an operation
known as a mastoidectomy may be car-
ried out to remove the infected air cells.
masturbation Sexual self-stimulation,
usually to orgasm. Massaging the penis
or the clitoris with the hand is the usual
method of masturbation. 
maternal mortality The death of a
woman during  pregnancy, or within 42
days of  childbirth,  miscarriage, or an
induced abortion, from any pregnancy-
related cause. Maternal mortality rate
describes the number of such deaths
per year per set number of pregnancies.
MATERNAL MORTALITY MASTICATION
M
MASTECTOMY
Lymph
node
SITE OF INCISION
Area of tissue 
to be removed
Incision around
breast and into
armpit
Cancerous
tumour358
Maternal deaths may occur as a direct
result of complications of pregnancy, or
indirectly due to a medical condition
worsened by pregnancy. Major direct
causes include  pulmonary embolism,
antepartumhaemorrhage,  postpartum
haemorrhage, hypertension, eclampsia,
and puerperal sepsis. Indirect causes
includeheart disease,  epilepsy, and
some cancers.
Maternal mortality is lowest for 2nd
pregnancies. It rises with age, being
greatest for women over 40.
maxilla One of a pair of bones that
together form the centre of the face, the
upper jaw, and the roof of the mouth.
Each maxilla contains a large air-filled
cavity (called the maxillary sinus) which
is connected to the nasal cavity.
McArdle＊s disease A rare genetic disor-
der characterized by muscle stiffness
and painful cramps that increase during
exertion and afterwards. The cause is a
deficiency of an enzyme in muscle cells
that stimulates breakdown of the carbo-
hydrate glycogen into the simple sugar
glucose. The result is a build-up of glyco-
gen and low levels of glucose in the
muscles. Damage to the muscles occurs,
causing myoglobinuria (muscle-cell pig-
mentin  the urine), which may lead to
kidney failure. There is no treatment, but
symptoms may be relieved by eating
glucose or fructose before exercise.
MDMA The hallucinogenic substance
methylenedioxymethamfetamine, which
has the street name Ecstasy.
ME The abbreviation for myalgic enceph-
alomyelitis (see chronic fatigue syndrome).
measles A potentially dangerous viral
illness that causes fever and a charac-
teristic rash. Measles mainly affects
children, but can occur at any age. The
virus is spread primarily by airborne
droplets of nasal secretions. It can be
transmitted during the incubationperiod
(8每14 days after infection) and up to 7
days after symptoms appear. 
The illness starts with a fever, runny
nose, sore eyes, cough, and a general
feeling of being unwell. After 3每4 days,
a red rash appears, usually starting on
the head and neck and spreading to
cover the body. The spots sometimes
join to produce large red blotches, and
the lymph nodes may be enlarged. After
3 days, the rash starts to fade and the
symptoms subside.
The most common complications are
ear and chest infections, which usually
occur 2每3 days after the rash appears.
Diarrhoea, vomiting, and abdominal
pain also occur. Febrile convulsions (see
convulsion, febrile) are also common,
but these are not usually serious. En-
cephalitis occurs in about 1 in 1000
cases, causing headache, drowsiness,
and vomiting. Seizures and  coma may
follow, sometimes leading to brain dam-
age or even death. In very rare cases, a
progressive brain disorder known as
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
develops years later. If measles occurs
during pregnancy, the fetus dies in about
a fifth of cases. However, there is no evi-
dence that measles causes birth defects. 
There is no specific treatment for
measles. Plenty of fluids and paraceta-
mol are given for fever, and  antibiotic
drugs may be given to treat bacterial
infections that occur as complications.
To help prevent measles, immunization
with the  MMR vaccination is recom-
mended at 12每15 months of age. This
produces immunity in about 90 per cent
of cases, with a booster shot given
before school or nursery school entry.
meatus A canal or passageway through
part of the body. The term usually refers
to the external auditory meatus, the 
canal in the outer  ear that leads from
the outside to the eardrum. 
mebendazole An anthelminticdrug used
to treat worm infestations of the intes-
tine. Possible adverse effects include
abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
mebeverine An antispasmodic drug used
to treat irritable bowel syndrome. 
Meckel＊s diverticulumA common prob-
lem, present at birth, in which a small,
hollow, wide-mouthed sac protrudes
from the  ileum. Symptoms only occur
when the diverticulum becomes infec-
ted, obstructed, or ulcerated. The most
common symptom is painless bleeding,
which may be sudden and severe, making
immediate  blood transfusion necessary.
Inflammation may cause symptoms very
similar to those of acute  appendicitis.
Meckel＊s diverticulum occasionally causes
MAXILLA MECKEL＊S DIVERTICULUM
M359
intussusception or  volvulus of the small
intestine. Diagnosisof Meckel＊s divertic-
ulum may be made by using technetium
radionuclide scanning. If complications
occur, they are treated by surgical re-
moval of the diverticulum. 
meconium The thick, sticky, greenish-
black faeces passed by infants in the
first day or two after birth. It consists of
bile, mucus, and shed intestinal cells. 
Occasionally, the fetus passes meco-
nium into the  amniotic fluid in the
uterus. This is more common in babies
who experience  fetal distress during
labour or who are over 40 weeks＊ gesta-
tion. Meconium in the amniotic fluid
may be inhaled when the baby starts to
breathe, sometimes blocking the air-
ways and damaging the lungs. 
In some babies with cystic fibrosis, the
meconium is so thick and sticky that 
it blocks the intestine (see  intestine,
obstruction of).
medial A medical term that means ※sit-
uated towards the midline of the body§. 
Less commonly, the term refers to the
middle layer of a body structure.
median nerve One of the main nerves
of the arm. It is a branch of the brachial
plexus and runs down the arm from the
shoulder into the hand. The median
nerve controls the muscles that carry
out bending movements of the wrist,
fingers, and thumb, and that rotate the
forearm palm-inwards. The nerve also
conveys sensations from the thumb and
first 3 fingers, and from the region of
the palm at their base.
Damage to the nerve may result from
injury to the shoulder, a Colles＊ fracture
just above the wrist, or pressure on the
nerve where it passes through the wrist
(carpal tunnel syndrome). Symptoms of
damage include numbness and weak-
ness in areas controlled by the nerve. 
mediastinoscopy Investigation of the
mediastinum by means of an endoscope
inserted through an incision in the neck. 
Mediastinoscopy is used mainly to
perform a biopsy of a  lymph node. The
sample is removed by tiny blades on
the endoscope.
mediastinum The membranous parti-
tion between the lungs and the other
structures within the chest cavity.These
structures include the heart and associ-
ated blood vessels,  trachea, oesophagus,
thymus gland,  lymph nodes, lymphatic
vessels, and nerves.
medication Any substance prescribed to
treat disease. (See also drug; medicine.)
medicine The study of human diseases,
their causes, frequency, treatment, and
prevention. The term is also applied to
a substance prescribed to treat illness.
medicolegal Relating to aspects of med-
icine and law that overlap. Among the
matters on which medicolegal experts
advise are the laws concerning damages
for injuries due to medical negligence
or malpractice, evidence concerning the
extent of injury in a civil action, the use
of paternity tests, the mental compet-
ence of people who have drawn up wills,
and restrictions on the mentally ill.
Medicolegal issues also include an
individual＊s right to die (see brain death;
euthanasia;  living will); the necessity for
informed  consent to any surgical pro-
cedure; the legal aspects of  artificial
insemination,  in vitro fertilization,  steril-
ization, and  surrogacy; and a patient＊s
right to confidentiality concerning his or
her illness. (For the medical aspects of
criminal law, see forensic medicine.)
meditation Concentrating on an object,
a word, or an idea with the aim of induc-
ingan altered state of consciousness. 
At its deepest level, meditation can
resemble a trance. More commonly, it is
a calming therapy and can be a way of
reducing stress levels and treating stress-
related disorders. A common form of
meditation practised in the west is tran-
scendental meditation (TM). 
medroxyprogesterone A  progestogen
drug used to treat  endometriosis and
certain types of breast cancer and uter-
ine cancer (see  uterus, cancer of). It is
sometimes used to treat menstrual dis-
orders such as  amenorrhoea (absence
of menstruation).Medroxyprogesterone
can also be used as a contraceptive,
administered by injection at 3-monthly
intervals (see  contraception, hormonal
methods of). Possible adverse effects
include weight gain, swollen ankles, and
breast tenderness.
medulla The innermost part of an organ
or other body structure; for example,
MEDULLA MECONIUM
Mthe adrenal medulla is the central
region of an  adrenal gland. The term
※medulla§ is also sometimes used to
refer to the medulla oblongata. 
medulla oblongata Also known as the
medulla, the lowest part of the  brain-
stem. The medulla oblongata lies in the
skull just above the spinal cord. 
medulloblastoma A type of cancerous
brain tumour that occurs mainly in chil-
dren. The tumour usually arises from the
cerebellum, which is concerned with
posture, balance, and coordination. It
grows rapidly and may spread to other
parts of the brain and to the spinal cord.
A morning headache, repeated vomiting,
and a clumsy gait develop. There are
also frequent falls. The tumour is diag-
nosed by CT scanning or MRI and often
responds to  radiotherapy. Surgery and
anticancer drugs may also be needed. 
mefenamic acid A  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug used to relieve pain
and inflammation. Possible adverse ef-
fects are typical for this group of drugs.
mefloquine A drug used for prevention
and treatment of malaria in parts of the
world where the parasite that causes it
is resistant to chloroquine. Mefloquine is
one of the preferred treatments for fal-
ciparum malaria. Side effects include
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea. Rarely,
there may be  panic attacks,  halluci-
nations, and psychosis.
MEDULLA OBLONGATA
360
mega- A prefix meaning very large, as in
megacolon, a condition in which the
colon is greatly enlarged. The prefix
megalo- has the same meaning.
megacolon A gross distension (enlarge-
ment) of the colon, usually accompanied
by severe, chronic constipation. 
In children, the main causes of mega-
colon are  anal fissures,  Hirschsprung＊s
disease, and psychological factors that
may have arisen during toilet-training.
In elderly people, causes include the
long-term use of strong  laxative drugs.
People suffering from chronic depression
or schizophrenia often have megacolon.
Other, rarer causes include  hypothy-
roidism, spinal injury, and drugs such as
morphine and codeine.
Megacolon causes constipation and
abdominal bloating. Associated loss of
appetite  may lead to weight loss. Diar-
rhoea may result if semi-liquid faeces
leak around the obstructing hard faeces.
Diagnosis is made by  proctoscopy,
barium X-ray examination, and tests of
bowel muscle function. If Hirschsprung＊s
disease is suspected, biopsy of the large
intestine may be performed. Impacted
faeces are often removed using enemas.
In severe cases, the faeces must be
removed manually.
megaloblastic anaemia See  anaemia,
megaloblastic.
megalomania An exaggerated sense of
one＊s own importance or ability that
often occurs in  mania. Megalomania
may take the form of a  delusion of
grandeur, or of a desire to organize
activities that are expensive, large in
scale, and involve many people.
-megaly A suffix meaning enlargement,
as in  acromegaly, a condition in which
there is enlargement of the skull, jaw,
hands, and feet due to excess produc-
tion of growth hormone.
megestrol A progestogen drug used to
treat certain types of breast cancer and
uterine cancer (see uterus, cancer of). It
may be prescribed when a tumour can-
not be removed by surgery, if a tumour
has recurred after surgery, or when
other  anticancer drugs or  radiotherapy
prove ineffective.
Possible adverse effects of megestrol
include swollen ankles, weight gain,
MEDULLA OBLONGATA MEGESTROL
Medulla
oblongata
Spinal
cord
Midbrain
Pons
Thalamus
LOCATION M
Brainstemor one suspected of being skin cancer,
can be removed surgically. 
melanoma, malignant The most seri-
ous of the 3 types of skin cancer, the
other 2 being  basal cell carcinoma and
squamous cell carcinoma. Malignant mel-
anoma is a tumour of melanocytes, the
cells that produce melanin, and is due to
long-term exposure to strong sunlight.
There are an increasing number of new
cases and deaths in the UK each year
from this skin cancer.
Tumours usually develop on exposed
skin but may occur anywhere on the
body. A melanoma usually grows from
an existing mole, which may enlarge,
become lumpy, bleed or crust over,
change colour, develop an irregular
edge, turn into a scab, or become itchy.
Occasionally, a melanoma develops in
normal skin. The tumour often spreads
to other parts of the body. Diagnosis is
by a  skin biopsy and the melanoma 
is removed surgically.  Radiotherapy or
anticancer drugs may also be necessary.
melanosis coli Black or brown discol-
oration of the colon lining, associated
with chronic constipation and prolonged
use of certain  laxative drugs, such as
senna, rhubarb, and cascara. 
The discoloration is most common in
elderly people and is usually symptom-
less, clearing up when the laxatives are
stopped. Rarely, it is associated with
colon cancer (see colon, cancer of). 
melasma See chloasma.
melatonin A  hormone secreted by the
pineal gland that is thought to play a
part in controlling daily body rhythms.
melphalan An  anticancer drug used to
treat multiple myeloma as well as certain
361
nausea, dizziness, headache, rash, and,
rarely, raised blood calcium level.
meibomian cyst See chalazion.
Meig＊s syndrome A rare condition in
which a tumour of an ovary is accompa-
nied by  ascites and a  pleural effusion.
The fluid usually disappears when the
tumour is removed. 
meiosis A type of cell division that
occurs in the ovaries and  testes during
the production of egg and sperm cells.
During meiosis in humans, a cell con-
taining 23 pairs of chromosomes (46 in
total) divides to form 4 sperm or egg
cells, each with 23 single chromosomes.
First, the chromosomes are duplicated
to produce 4 copies of each chromosome
(92 in total). Matching pairs of chromo-
somes line up and exchange genetic
material. The cell then divides twice to
form 4 daughter cells, with each taking
1 copy of each chromosome. Egg and
sperm cells therefore have only half the
usual chromosome content of a body
cell, so that each parent contributes
half of the child＊s genetic material. The
exchange between chromosomes means
that each daughter cell has a unique
genetic make-up. (See also mitosis).
melaena Black, tarry  faeces caused by
bleeding, usually in the upper gastroin-
testinal tract. The blood is blackened 
by the action of secretions during diges-
tion. Melaena is usually caused by a
peptic ulcer but may indicate cancer.
melancholia Former term for depression.
melanin The brown or black pigment
that gives skin, hair, and the iris of the
eyes their colouring. Melanin is pro-
duced by cells called melanocytes. 
Exposure to sunlight increases the
production of melanin, which protects
the skin from the harmful effects of
ultraviolet rays and causes the skin to
darken. Localized overproduction of
melanin in the skin can result in a pig-
mented spot, most commonly a  freckle
or mole (see naevus).
melanocyte Aspecialized skin cell that
produces the pigment melanin.
melanoma, juvenile A raised, reddish-
brown skin blemish which sometimes
appears on the face or legs in early
childhood (see  naevus). Although they
are usually harmless, an unsightly growth,
MELPHALAN MEIBOMIAN CYST
M MELANOMA, MALIGNANT
Crusted surface Irregular edge362
types of breast cancer and ovarian can-
cer (see ovary, cancer of).
Possible adverse effects include nausea,
vomiting, sore throat, loss of appetite,
aplastic  anaemia, abnormal bleeding,
and increased susceptibility to infection. 
membrane A layer of tissue that covers
or lines a body surface or forms a barrier.
memory The ability to remember. Mem-
ory is usually thought of as having 3
stages: registration, storage, and recall.
In registration, information is perceived,
understood, and stored in short-term
memory. Unless they are constantly
repeated, the contents of short-term
memory are lost in minutes. In reten-
tion, important information is transferred
into long-term memory and stored.
Recall involves bringing information
into the conscious mind at will.
Many factors determine how well
something is remembered, including its
familiarity and how much attention has
been paid to it. 
It is not known where in the brain the
memory process takes place. However,
the temporal lobe and  limbic system
may be involved. The mechanisms for
storing memory are also unknown. 
Most memory disturbances are due to
failure at the retention or recall stage
(see amnesia). In some cases, the prob-
lem occurs at the registration stage.
Some people with  temporal lobe epi-
lepsy have uncontrollable flashbacks of
distant past events. The most common
memory disorder is the normal diffi-
culty in recall that develops with age.
More severe loss of memory may be an
early symptom of dementia. 
memory, loss of See amnesia.
menarche The onset of  menstruation.
Menarche usually occurs around age 13,
2 or 3 years after puberty starts. 
M谷ni豕re＊s disease An inner ear disor-
der characterized by recurrent  vertigo,
deafness, and  tinnitus. The cause is a
build-up of fluid in the  labyrinth. The
fluid build-up may damage the labyrinth
and sometimes the adjacent cochlea.
The disease is uncommon before the
age of 40. There is a sudden attack of
vertigo, lasting from a few minutes to
several hours. This is usually accompa-
nied by nausea, vomiting,  nystagmus,
and deafness, tinnitus, and a feeling of
pressure or pain in the affected ear. 
Diagnosis is usually made with audi-
ometry (see  hearing tests) or other
hearing tests, and a  caloric test. Treat-
ment with certain  antihistamine drugs,
such as  cinnarizine, or with  betahistine
usually relieves the symptoms, although
prochlorperazine may be given, either
rectally or by injection, for severe
attacks. M谷ni豕re＊s disease can also be
treated by surgery to the inner ear if
symptoms are not controlled by drugs.
If deafness eventually becomes total,
the other symptoms usually disappear. 
meninges The 3 membranes that cover
and protect the  brain and the  spinal
cord. The outer membrane, the dura
mater, is tough and fibrous; it lines the
inside of the skull and forms a loose
sheath around the spinal cord. The
middle membrane, the arachnoid mater,
is elastic and web-like. The inner mem-
brane, the pia mater, lies directly next
to the brain. It is separated from the
arachnoid mater by the subarachnoid
space, which contains cerebrospinal fluid.
meningioma A rare, noncancerous tu-
mourof  the meninges of the brain that
arises from the arachnoid mater (middle
layer) and usually becomes attached to
the dura mater (outer layer). The tumour
slowly expands and may become very
large before any symptoms appear.
Symptoms can include headache, vom-
iting, and impaired mental function.
MEMBRANE MENINGIOMA
M MENINGES
Dura mater 
Meninges
SkullGrey matter of brain
White matter
of brain
LOCATION
Arachnoid
mater
Pia materThere may also be speech loss or visual
disturbance. If the tumour invades the
skull bone, there may be thickening and
bulging of the skull. 
Meningiomas can be detected by 
X-ray or  CT scanning, and MRI of the
skull, and can often be completely re-
moved by surgery. Otherwise, treatment
is by radiotherapy.
meningitis Inflammation of the menin-
ges (membranes covering the brain and
spinal cord), usually due to infection.
Viral meningitis tends to occur in epi-
demics in the winter; it is relatively mild.
Bacterial meningitis is life-threatening.
It is mainly caused by the HAEMOPHILUS
INFLUENZAE bacterium, and  MENINGO-
COCCUS type B and C bacteria. 
The infection usually reaches the
meninges via the bloodstream from an
infection elsewhere in the body. Less
commonly, it passes through skull cavi-
ties from an infected ear or  sinus, or
from the air following a skull fracture.
The main symptoms are fever, severe
headache, nausea and vomiting, dislike
of light, and a stiff neck. In viral menin-
gitis, the symptoms are mild and may
resemble influenza. In bacterial menin-
gitis, the main symptoms may develop
over only a few hours, followed by
drowsiness and, occasionally, loss of
consciousness. In about half the cases
of meningococcal meningitis, there is
also a rash under the skin that does not
fade with pressure (see  glass test). The
rash starts as pin-prick spots that can
join to give a bruise-like appearance.
To make a diagnosis, a lumbar puncture
is performed. Viral meningitis needs no
treatment and usually clears up within a
week or two with no after-effects. Bacte-
rial meningitis is a medical emergency.
It is treated with intravenous  antibiotic
drugs.With prompt treatment, a full re-
covery is usually made. However, brain
damage may occur in some cases. 
Vaccines are now given to protect chil-
dren against 2 of the major types of
bacterial meningitis: those caused by
the  HAEMOPHILUS INFLUENZAE bacterium
and the  MENINGOCOCCUS type C bacte-
rium (see immunization). For other types
of bacterial meningitis, antibiotic drugs
are given as a protective measure to
363
people who have come into contact
with the infection. 
meningocele A protrusion of the spinal
cord  meninges under the skin that is
caused by a congenital defect in the
spine (see spina bifida). 
meningomyelocele Another name for
myelocele (see spina bifida).
meniscectomy A surgical procedure in
which all or part of a damaged meniscus
(cartilage disc) is removed from a joint,
almost always from the knee. Menis-
cectomy may be carried out when
damage to the meniscus causes the
knee to lock or to give way repeatedly. 
The procedure cures these symptoms
and reduces the likelihood of premature
osteoarthritis in the joint.
Arthroscopy may be carried out to
confirm and locate the damage, and the
damaged area removed by instruments
passed through the arthroscope.
Alternatively, the meniscus may be
removed through an incision at the side
of the patella (kneecap).
In either case, there may be an in-
creased risk of osteoarthritis in later
life, but this is less than if the damaged
meniscus had been left in place.
meniscus A crescent-shaped disc of
cartilaginous tissue found in several
joints. The knee joint has 2 menisci, and
the  wrist joints, and the  temporo-
mandibular joints of the jaw, have one
each. The menisci are held in position
by ligaments and help to reduce friction
during joint movement. 
menopause The cessation of menstrua-
tion, which usually occurs between the
ages of 45 and 55. The term is usually
used to refer to a period of physical and
psychological changes that occur as a
result of reduced oestrogen production. 
Symptoms of menopause include  hot
flushes and night sweats; vaginal dry-
ness caused by thinning of the vaginal
skin; and a decrease in vaginal secre-
tions. The vagina shrinks and loses
elasticity, and becomes prone to minor
infections. Vaginal dryness may also
make sexual intercourse more difficult
and painful (see  vaginitis). The neck of
the bladder and urethra undergo similar
changes, which can result in a feeling of
needing to urinate frequently.
MENOPAUSE MENINGITIS
M364
Psychological symptoms, such as poor
concentration, tearfulness, loss of inter-
est in sex, and depression, are also
often attributed to the menopause.
Changes in metabolism occur during the
menopause but may not cause symp-
toms until later. Bones become thinner,
and osteoporosis may develop. There is
also an increased level of fats in the
blood, which may cause an increase in
atherosclerosis and a higher incidence
of coronary artery disease and stroke.
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
may relieve menopausal symptoms.
HRT reduces the risk of fractures associ-
ated with osteoporosis. However, it has
been associated with a slightly in-
creased risk of breast cancer. For most
women, treatment is recommended for
a duration of around 10 years. 
menorrhagia Excessive loss of blood
during menstruation. Menorrhagia may
be caused by an imbalance of oestrogen
hormones and  progesterone hormone,
which control menstruation. The imbal-
ance causes an excessive build-up of
endometrium (lining of the uterus). Dis-
orders that affect the uterus, such as
fibroids, polyps, or a pelvic infection, can
also cause menorrhagia.
Treatment may include  nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, drugs that affect
blood clotting, hormones, or the fitting
of an  IUD  (intrauterine device) that
releases small amounts of progestogen.
Menorrhagia may also be treated by
endometrial ablation. 
menotrophin A gonadotrophin hormone
given as a drug to stimulate cell activity
in the ovaries and testes. It is used as a
treatment for certain types of male and
female  infertility, as it prepares the
ovary for ovulation and may help stimu-
late sperm production. It is used along
with human chorionic gonadotrophin
(see gonadotrophin, human chorionic). 
In women, menotrophin may cause
multiple pregnancy, abdominal pain,
bloating, and weight gain. In men, it
may cause enlargement of the breasts.
menstruation The periodic shedding of
endometrium, accompanied by bleed-
ing, that occurs in women who are not
pregnant. It usually begins at  puberty
and continues until the menopause.
Menstruation occurs at the end of the
menstrual cycle, which usually lasts for
28 days (the normal range is 21每35 days).
At the beginning of the cycle, a hormone
from the  pituitary gland stimulates an
egg  follicle in an  ovary to mature. The
follicle secretes  oestrogen hormones,
which make the endometrium thicken. 
Ovulation (release of an egg from the
follicle) usually occurs in the middle of
the menstrual cycle. The empty follicle
also produces  progesterone hormone,
which makes the endometrium become
swollen and thick with retained fluid.
This enables a fertilized egg to implant
in the endometrium. If pregnancy fails
to occur, the production of oestrogens
and progesterone diminishes. The endo-
metrium is then shed about 14 days
after ovulation. Uterine contractions
force the menstrual discharge to be
expelled into the vagina, accompanied
by bleeding, which may last for 1每8 days.
menstruation, disorders of An abnor-
mality in the monthly cycle of menstrual
bleeding. Menstrual disorders may be a
sign of a problem in the pelvic area,
such as fibroids, endometriosis, or pelvic
inflammatory disease, but the cause is
often unknown.
Dysmenorrhoea (painful periods) is the
most common type of menstrual disor-
der. Other types of menstrual disorder
are amenorrhoea (absence of menstrua-
tion), polymenorrhoea (too frequent
menstruation), oligomenorrhoea (infre-
quent periods or scanty blood loss),
and menorrhagia (excessive bleeding).
Some women have extreme variations
in the length of menstrual cycles or
menstrual periods, or in the amount of
blood lost (see menstruation, irregular).
menstruation, irregular A variation
in the normal pattern of menstruation.
Irregular menstruation can include vari-
ations in the interval between periods,
in the duration of menstrual bleeding,
or in the amount of blood that is lost. 
The most common cause of irregular
menstruation is a disturbed balance of
oestrogen hormones and  progesterone
hormone. Other causes include  stress,
travel, a change in the method of  con-
traception, unsuspected pregnancy, or
early miscarriage.
MENORRHAGIAMENSTRUATION, IRREGULAR
M365
Menstruation is often irregular for the
first few years, and for several years
before the menopause.
mental age A measurement of the intel-
lectual development of a person, with
regard to the normal age at which that
level of achievement is attained. For
example, a 13 year-old child with learning
difficulties may have a mental age of 5.
mental handicap Impaired intellectual
development, also known as general
learning difficulties or disability.
Mental Health Act The Mental Health
Act (1983) details the rights of patients
with mental illness and the grounds for
detaining mentally ill people against
their will. It also outlines forms of legal
guardianship for such patients.
When a person is endangering his or
her own or other people＊s health or
safety (for example, threatening harm
or suicide) because of a recognized
mental illness, he or she may be com-
pulsorily taken into hospital to be given
treatment. If a person breaks the law
because of a mental disorder, the courts
may remand him or her to hospital.
mental hospital A hospital, formerly
known as an asylum, specializing in the
treatment of psychiatric illness. 
Most admissions to mental hospitals
are for acute psychiatric illness. The
majority of admissions are voluntary,
but in some cases detention under the
Mental Health Act may be necessary.
mental illness A general term that des-
cribes any form of psychiatric disorder. 
mental retardation See Learning diffi-
culties.
menthol An alcohol prepared from mint
oils. Menthol is an ingredient of several
over-the-counter inhalation preparations
used to treat a blocked or stuffy nose.
meprobamate An antianxiety drug used
in the treatment of anxiety and stress. It
also acts as a muscle relaxant. 
meptazinol A weak opioid  analgesic
drug used for the short-term relief of
moderate to severe pain, such as after
surgery and during childbirth. Possible
adverse effects include nausea, vomit-
ing, and dizziness.
mercaptopurine An  anticancer drug
used to treat certain types of leukaemia.
Adverse effects include nausea, mouth
ulcers, and appetite loss. Rarely, it may
cause liver damage,  anaemia, and ab-
normal bleeding.
mercury The only metal that is liquid at
room temperature. Mercury is used in
thermometers, sphygmomanometers, and
fillings for teeth (see amalgam, dental).
mercury poisoning Toxic effects of
mercury on the body. The most com-
mon cause of mercury poisoning is
breathing in vapour given off by liquid
mercury, usually as a result of industrial
exposure. Swallowing a small amount
of liquid mercury is unlikely to lead to
poisoning. Mercury compounds may
cause poisoning by absorption through
the intestines (causing nausea, vomit-
ing, diarrhoea, and abdominal pain) or
the skin (causing severe inflammation).
After entering the body, mercury accu-
mulates in organs, principally the brain
and kidneys. Mercury deposits in the
brain cause tiredness, incoordination,
excitability, tremors, and numbness in
the limbs. In severe cases, there may 
be impaired vision and  dementia. De-
posits of mercury in the kidneys may
lead to kidney failure. 
Treatment may involve chelating agents,
which help the body to excrete the mer-
cury quickly; haemodialysis (see dialysis);
and induced vomiting or pumping out
the stomach, if mercury has been swal-
lowed within the previous few hours.
mesalazine A drug used to treat ulcera-
tive colitis. Adverse effects of mesalazine
include nausea, diarrhoea, abdominal
pain, and headache.
mescaline A hallucinogenic drug obtain-
edfrom the Mexican peyote cactus. 
mesenteric lymphadenitis An acute
abdominal disorder, mainly affecting
children, in which  lymph nodes in the
mesentery become inflamed. The main
symptoms of pain and tenderness in
the abdomen may mimic appendicitis.
There may also be mild fever. Mesen-
teric lymphadenitis usually clears up
rapidly, needing only analgesic drugs to
reduce pain and fever. 
mesentery A membrane that attaches
organs to the abdominal wall. The term
is used particularly to refer to the mem-
branous fold that encloses the small
intestine, attaching it to the back of the
MESENTERY MENTAL AGE
Mabdominal wall. The mesentery con-
tains the blood vessels, nerves, and
lymphatic vessels for the intestines.
mesothelioma A cancerous tumour of
the pleura. Exposure to asbestos dust is
a risk factor (see  asbestos-related dis-
eases). Symptoms, which do not always
occur, include cough, chest pain, and
breathing difficulty, especially if a pleu-
ral effusion develops. Diagnosis is made
with a  chest X-ray  followed by pleural
biopsy or examination of a fluid sample
from any effusion. If the tumour is
small, surgery is often successful. There
is no effective treatment for large
tumours, although  radiotherapy  may
alleviate symptoms.
mesothelium A type of epithelium cov-
ering the  peritoneum, the  pleura, and
the pericardium.
mesterolone An  androgen hormone
(male sex hormone) used as replace-
ment therapy in hypogonadism because
testosterone cannot be given orally.
Side effects can include prostate prob-
lems, headache, and depression.
mestranol An  oestrogen drug used in
some oral contraceptives.
metabolic disorders A group of dis-
orders in which some aspect of body
chemistry is disturbed. Some metabolic
disorders result from an inherited mal-
function or deficiency of an enzyme (see
metabolism, inborn errors of). Others
result from under- or overproduction of
a hormone that controls metabolic acti-
vity, such as occurs in diabetes mellitus
and hypothyroidism.
366
metabolism A collective term for all the
chemical processes that take place in
the body. It is divided into catabolism
(breaking down of complex substances
into simpler ones) and anabolism
(building up of complex substances
from simpler ones). Usually, catabolism
releases energy, while anabolism uses it.
The energy needed to keep the body
functioning at rest is called the basal
metabolic rate (BMR). It is measured in
joules (or kilocalories) per square metre
of body surface per hour. The BMR
increases in response to factors such as
stress, fear, exertion, and illness, and is
controlled principally by various hor-
mones, such as  thyroxine,  adrenaline
(epinephrine), and  insulin. (See also
metabolism, inborn errors of; metabolic
disorders.)
metabolism, inborn errors of Inher-
ited defects of body chemistry. Inborn
errors of metabolism are caused by
single  gene defects, which lead to ab-
normal functioning of an enzyme.
Some of these gene defects are harm-
less, but others are severe enough to
result in death or physical or mental
handicap. Examples include  Tay每Sachs
disease,  phenylketonuria,  Hurler＊s syn-
drome, and Lesch每Nyhan syndrome.
Collectively, inborn errors of meta-
bolism affect around 1 child in 5,000.
Symptoms are usually present at or
soon after birth. They may include
unexplained illness or failure to thrive,
developmental delay, floppiness, per-
sistent vomiting, or seizures. 
Routine tests are performed on new-
born babies for some genetic disorders,
such as phenylketonuria.
Treatment is not needed for some
inborn errors of metabolism. For others,
avoidance of a specific environmental
factor may be sufficient. In some cases,
the missing enzyme or the protein that
it produces can be manufactured using
genetic engineering techniques, or a
vitamin supplement can help compen-
sate for the defective enzyme. If the
enzyme is made in blood cells, a bone
marrow transplant may provide a cure.
People with a child or a close relative
who is affected may benefit from genetic
counselling before planning a pregnancy.
MESOTHELIOMAMETABOLISM, INBORN ERRORS OF
M
MESENTERY
Stomach
Large
intestine
Mesentery
Small
intestine
(pulled
aside to
reveal
mesentery)367
metabolite Any substance involved in a
metabolic reaction (a biochemical reac-
tion in the body). The term metabolite
is sometimes used to refer only to the
products of a metabolic reaction. (See
also metabolism.)
metacarpal bone One of 5 long, cylin-
drical bones within the hand. The bones
run from the wrist to the base of each
digit, with the heads of the bones form-
ing the knuckles. 
metaplasia A change in tissue resulting
from the transformation of one type of
cell into another. Usually harmless, but
occasionally precancerous, metaplasia
can affect the lining of various organs,
such as the bronchi (airways) and blad-
der. Metaplasia of the cervix, which
occurs in cervical erosion, can be detec-
ted by a cervical smear test.
metastasis A secondary cancerous tu-
mour (one that has spread from a
primary  cancer to another part of the
body). The term also applies to the pro-
cess by which such spread occurs.
Metastases can spread through the lym-
phatic system, in the bloodstream, or
across a body cavity.
metatarsal bone One of 5 long, cylin-
drical bones within the foot. The bones
make up the central skeleton of the foot
and are held in an arch by the surround-
ing ligaments. 
metatarsalgia Pain in the foot. Causes
include fracture of a metatarsal bone, flat-
feet, or neuroma of a nerve in the foot.
metatarsophalangeal joint The joint
between each  metatarsal bone and its
adjoining toe bone (see phalanges). The
metatarsophalangeal joint at the base
of the big toe is commonly affected by
gout and by hallux rigidus. 
metformin An oral hypoglycaemic drug
(see  hypoglycaemics,  oral) that lowers
blood glucose levels and is used to
treat type 2  diabetes mellitus. Possible
adverse effects include loss of appetite, a
metallic taste in the mouth, nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhoea.
methadone A synthetic opioid  analg-
esic drug that resembles morphine.
Methadone is used under supervision
to relieve withdrawal symptoms in peo-
ple undergoing a heroin or morphine
detoxification programme. Side effects
may include nausea, vomiting, consti-
pation, dizziness, and dry mouth.
methane A colourless, odourless, highly
inflammable gas that occurs naturally
in oil wells and coal mines. Methane is
also produced by the decomposition of
organic matter; it is one of the gases
present in intestinal gas (see flatus).
methanol A poisonous type of  alcohol
that is used as a solvent or paint re-
mover and in some types of antifreeze.
Methanol poisoning usually occurs as a
result of drinking it as a substitute for
ordinary alcohol. Symptoms of poison-
ing include headache, dizziness, nausea,
vomiting, and unconsciousness. Dam-
age may also occur to the retina and the
optic nerve, causing blurred vision. Re-
peated or large doses of methanol may
result in permanent blindness.
methicillin-resistant staphylococcus
aureus See MRSA.
methotrexate An anticancer drug used
to treat lymphoma (cancer of the lymph
nodes) and some forms of  leukaemia.
Methotrexate is also used to treat can-
cers of the uterus, breast, ovary, lung,
bladder, and testis, and severe psoriasis
when other treatments are ineffective.
Methotrexate may cause nausea, vomit-
ing, diarrhoea, mouth ulcers,  anaemia,
increased susceptibility to infection,
and abnormal bleeding.
methyl alcohol An alternative name 
for methanol.
methylcellulose A bulk-forming laxative
drug used to treat constipation,  irritable
bowel syndrome, and diverticular disease.
Methylcellulose increases the firmness
of faeces in chronic watery  diarrhoea
and regulates their consistency in peo-
ple who have a colostomy or  ileostomy.
It is also given as eyedrops to relieve
dry eyes. As methylcellulose causes a
feeling of fullness, it is sometimes used
to help treat obesity.
methyldopa An  antihypertensive drug.
Adverse effects include drowsiness,
depression, and nasal congestion.
methylenedioxymethamfetamine See
Ecstasy.
methylphenidate A central nervous
system stimulant drug used, under spe-
cialist supervision, to treat  attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in
METHYLPHENIDATE METABOLITE
M368
children. Possible adverse effects of
methylphenidate include loss of appe-
tite, tremors, sleeplessness, and rashes.
methylprednisolone A  corticosteroid
drug used to treat severe  asthma, skin
inflammation,  inflammatory bowel dis-
ease, and certain types of  arthritis.
Adverse effects are the same as for
other corticosteroid drugs.
methysergide A drug used to prevent
migraine and cluster headaches. Methy-
sergide is usually given only under
hospital supervision, when other treat-
ments have been ineffective.
Adverse effects of this drug can in-
clude dizziness, drowsiness, and nausea.
Long-term treatment may cause chest
pain, kidney failure, or leg cramps.
metoclopramide An  antiemetic drug.
It is used to prevent and treat nausea
and vomiting, including that associated
with migraine or caused by anticancer
drugs, radiotherapy, or anaesthetic drugs.
Metoclopramide may be given with a
premedication to reduce the risk of
inhaling vomit when under an anaes-
thetic. Adverse effects can include dry
mouth, sedation, or diarrhoea. Large
doses may cause uncontrollable move-
ments of the face, mouth, and tongue. 
metolazone A  diuretic drug used to
treat  hypertension. Metolazone is also
given to reduce oedema in people with
heart failure, kidney disorders,  cirrhosis
of the liver, or  premenstrual syndrome.
It is also used to treat certain types of
kidney stone (see  calculus, urinary
tract). Adverse effects can include weak-
ness, lethargy, and dizziness.
metoprolol A cardioselective beta-blocker
drug that is used to treat  angina pec-
toris and  hypertension and to relieve
symptoms of hyperthyroidism. It is also
given after a  myocardial infarction to
reduce the risk of further damage to the
heart. Adverse effects of metoprolol
include lethargy, cold hands and feet,
nightmares, and rash.
metronidazole An antibiotic drug used
to treat infections caused by  anaerobic
bacteria, such as a dental  abscess and
peritonitis. Metronidazole is also used
to treat protozoan infections, such as
trichomoniasis and  amoebiasis. Adverse
effects include nausea and vomiting,
loss of appetite, abdominal pain, and
dark-coloured urine. Alcohol should be
avoided during treatment.
mexiletine An antiarrhythmic drug used
to treat certain heart-rhythm disorders,
usually after a  myocardial infarction.
Possible adverse effects include nausea,
vomiting, dizziness, and tremor.
mianserin An antidepressant drug used
to treat severe  depression, especially
that accompanied by  anxiety or  insom-
nia. Mianserin usually takes several
weeks to become fully effective. Possi-
ble adverse effects include dry mouth,
blurred vision, constipation, dizziness,
and drowsiness. Rarely, prolonged use
may reduce blood cell production; regu-
lar  blood counts are therefore carried
out during treatment.
miconazole An antifungal drug used to
treat  tinea skin infections, such as  ath-
lete＊s foot, vaginal  candidiasis (thrush),
and fungal infections of internal organs.
Miconazole in the form of a cream or
vaginal suppository may, in rare cases,
cause a burning sensation or a rash.
micro- A prefix meaning small, as in
microorganisms (tiny organisms).
microangiopathy Any disease or dis-
order of the small blood vessels. It may
be a feature of conditions such as dia-
betes mellitus,  septicaemia,  eclampsia,
glomerulonephritis, and advanced  can-
cer. When microangiopathy occurs with
these conditions, the small blood ves-
sels become distorted, and red blood
cells are damaged. This causes micro-
angiopathic haemolytic anaemia (see
anaemia, haemolytic)
microbe A popular term for a microor-
ganism, particularly a harmful type that
causes disease.
microbiology The study of microor-
ganisms, particularly those that are
pathogenic (disease-causing).
microcephaly An abnormally small head,
usually associated with learning difficul-
ties. Microcephaly may occur if the brain
is damaged before or during birth, or if
there is injury or disease in early infancy.
microdiscectomy Surgery to relieve
pressure on the spinal cord, or a nerve
root emerging from it, that is caused by
protrusion of the soft core of an inter-
vertebral disc (see  disc prolapse). The
METHYLPREDNISOLONEMICRODISCECTOMY
M369
procedure is performed under general
anaesthesia and involves removing the
protruding tissue via a small incision in
the outer coat of the disc.
microorganism A tiny, single-celled liv-
ing organism. Most microorganisms are
too small to be seen by the naked eye. 
microphthalmos A rare congenital dis-
order of the  eye. Affected children are
born with an abnormally small eye on
one or both sides.
microscope An instrument for produc-
ing a magnified image of a small object.
Microscopes are used to examine the
structure and chemical composition of
cells and tissues, and to investigate
microorganisms and diseased tissues.
In the operating theatre, microscopes
are used in microsurgery. 
Compound microscopes are the most
widely used type. They have 2 lens sys-
tems (the objective and the eyepiece),
mounted at opposite ends of a tube
called the body tube. There is a stage to
hold the specimen, a light source, and
an optical condenser which concentrates
the light. The maximum magnification is
about 1,500 times.
Phase-contrast and interference micro-
scopes are modified light microscopes
that allow unstained transparent speci-
mens to be seen. They are used for
examining living cells and tissues. 
Fluorescence microscopes use ultra-
violet light to study specimens stained
with fluorescent dyes.
Electron microscopes give much higher
magnifications than light microscopes
by using a beam of electrons instead of
M
light. There are 2 types: transmission
electron microscopes (TEMs) and scan-
ning electron microscopes (SEMs). TEMs
can magnify up to about 5,000,000
times, enabling tiny viruses and molec-
ules to be seen. SEMs have a lower
maximum magnification (100,000 times),
but produce 3-dimensional images.
This makes them useful for studying
surface structures of cells and tissues.
microsurgery Surgery in which the
surgeon views the operation site via a
special binocular microscope with
pedal-operated magnification, focusing,
and movement. The technique of micro-
surgery is used for surgery involving
minute, delicate, or not easily accessi-
ble tissues. Examples include surgery
on the eye or the inside of the ear.
micturition A term for passing urine.
midazolam A benzodiazepine drug used
as premedication. Adverse effects include
confusion, drowsiness, and dizziness. If
benzodiazepines are taken for a long
period, dependence may result.
midbrain The top part of the brainstem,
situated above the pons. The midbrain
is also called the mesencephalon.
middle ear See ear.
middle-ear effusion, persistent See
glue ear.
middle-ear infection See otitis media.
mid-life crisis A popular phrase to
describe the feelings of distress that
affect some people in early middle age
after they realize that they are no longer
young. Counselling and support are
usually effective in helping people to
come to terms with the changes of age. 
MID-LIFE CRISIS MICROORGANISM
MICRODISCECTOMY
Spinal
nerves
Compressed
nerve root
BEFORE THE OPERATION
SITE OF
INCISION 
Fibrous outer
coat of disc
Protruding core
Normal
nerve root
Repaired
fibrous coat
Gelatinous core
AFTER THE OPERATION 370
midwifery The profession that is con-
cerned with assisting women in
pregnancy and childbirth.
mifepristone A sex hormone drug used
to induce medical termination of a
pregnancy (see abortion, induced). Pos-
sible adverse effects include malaise,
faintness, nausea, rash, and, rarely, uter-
ine bleeding. Women over 35 who smoke
should not be given the drug.
migraine A severe headache, typically
lasting 4每72 hours, accompanied by
visual disturbances and/or nausea and
vomiting. Migraine attacks may be iso-
lated or may recur at varying intervals.
There is no single cause of migraine,
although it tends to run in families.
Stress-related, food-related, or sensory-
related factors may trigger an attack.
Menstruation and  oral contraceptives
may also trigger migraine.
There are 2 types: migraine with aura
(an impression of flashing lights and/or
numbness and tingling), and migraine
without aura. In migraine without aura,
there is a slowly worsening headache,
often on one side of the head, with nau-
sea and sometimes vomiting.
In migraine with aura, there may be
visual disturbances for up to an hour, fol-
lowed by a severe one-sided headache,
nausea, vomiting and light-sensitivity.
Other temporary neurological symp-
toms, such as weakness in one half of
the body, may occur.
Diagnosis is usually made from the
history and a physical examination.
Treatment for an attack is an  analgesic
drug such as aspirin or paracetamol, plus
an  antiemetic drug, if needed. If this is
not effective, treatment with  serotonin
agonists such as  sumatriptan may be
prescribed. Ergotamine may prevent an
attack if taken before the headache
begins, but is now rarely used. Sleeping
in a darkened room may hasten recovery.
For frequent attacks, preventive treat-
ment may be needed. Keeping a diary
can help pinpoint trigger factors, and
prophylactic drugs may be prescribed.
(See also cluster headaches.)
milia Tiny, harmless, hard, white spots
thatusually occur in clusters around the
nose and on the upper cheeks in new-
born babies and also in young adults.
milk A  nutrient fluid produced by the
mammary glands of mammals. 
milk每alkali syndrome A rare type of
hypercalcaemia accompanied by alkalosis
and kidney failure. The syndrome is due
to excessive, long-term intake of calcium-
containing antacid drugs and milk. It is
most common in people with a  peptic
ulcer and associated kidney disorders.
Symptoms include weakness, muscle
pains, irritability, and apathy. Treatment
is to reduce milk and antacid intake.
milk of magnesia A magnesium prep-
aration as an antacid and laxative drug.
milk teeth See primary teeth.
Minamata disease The name given to
a severe form of mercury poisoning that
occurred in the mid-1950s, in people
who had eaten polluted fish from Mina-
mata Bay, Japan. Many people suffered
severe nerve damage and some died.
mineralization, dental The deposition
of calcium crystals and other mineral
salts in developing teeth. (See calcifica-
tion, dental.) 
mineralocorticoid The term used to
describe a  corticosteroid hormone that
controls the amount of salts that are
excreted in urine. 
minerals In nutrition, chemical elements
that are essential in the diet. At least 20
minerals, including potassium, sodium,
and calcium, are vital for health. Some,
such as iron and zinc, are needed in
only tiny amounts (see trace elements).
mineral supplements Dietary supple-
ments containing one or more minerals
in tablet or liquid form.Some mineral
supplements may be harmful in excess.
Iron is the most commonly taken mineral
supplement and is used to treat  iron-
deficiency anaemia. It may also be given
to pregnant or breast-feeding women.
(See also individual mineral entries.)
minilaparotomy A procedure for female
sterilization (see sterilization, female).
minimal access surgery See minim-
ally invasive surgery
minimal brain dysfunction A hypo-
thetical condition thought to account
for behavioural and other problems in
children for which no physical cause is
found. It may be a cause of some learn-
ing difficulties, difficulty in concentrating,
impulsiveness, and hyperactivity.
MIDWIFERY MINIMAL BRAIN DYSFUNCTION
Mminimally invasive surgery Surgery
using a rigid endoscope passed into the
body through a small incision. Further
small openings are made for surgical
instruments so that the operation can
be performed without a long surgical
incision. Minimally invasive surgery
may be used for many operations in 
the abdomen (see  laparoscopy), includ-
ing  appendicectomy,  cholecystectomy,
hernia repair, and many gynaecological
procedures. Knee operations (see arth-
roscopy) are also often performed by
minimally invasive surgery.
minipill An oral contraceptive contain-
ing a  progestogen drug. It makes the
mucus lining the cervix so thick that
sperm cannot pass through. It also has
other effects that impede conception.
Possible adverse effects include irregu-
lar periods, bleeding between periods,
ectopic pregnancy,and ovarian cysts.
minocycline A tetracycline  antibiotic
drug used to treat  acne, respiratory-
tract infections, and some genitourinary
infections. It is also usedto prevent
meningococcal meningitis.
minoxidil A  vasodilator drug used to
treat severe  hypertension when other
drugs have been ineffective. Prolonged
use can stimulate hair growth, and so it
is used in lotion form as a treatment for
male-pattern baldness (see alopecia).
miosis Constriction of the pupil of the
eye. Miosis may be caused by drugs
such as pilocarpine or opium, by a dis-
ease affecting the  autonomic nervous
system, or by bright light. A degree of
miosis is normal in older people.
miotic drugs  Drugs used in the treat-
ment of glaucoma to reduce pressure in
the eye. Used  topically, miotic drugs
cause the pupil to contract, which opens
up the drainage channels and drains
fluid from the front of the eye. Side
effects include headache, particularly
over the  eye, and blurred vision. Com-
mon miotics include carbachol and
pilocarpine. (See also mydriatic drugs.)
miscarriage Loss of the fetus before
the 24th week of pregnancy or viability
(the ability to survive outside the uterus
without artificial support). The medical
term is spontaneous abortion. 
MISCARRIAGE MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERY
M
371
MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERY
Intravenous
fluid
Anaesthetic
equipment
Endoscope
Monitor
INSIDE THE ABDOMEN
Rigid endoscope
Surgical instruments
MINIMALLY INVASIVE ABDOMINAL SURGERY
Surgeon
Instrument
table
Suction
instrument
Assistant
surgeon372
The majority of miscarriages occur in
the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, and may
be mistaken for a late menstrual period.
Miscarriages may occur because of
chromosomal abnormalities or develop-
mental defects in the fetus, or because
of severe illness, exposure to toxins, or
an  autoimmune disorder  in the mother.
Miscarriages later in pregnancy may be
caused by  genetic disorders,  cervical
incompetence, a defect in the uterus, or
large uterine fibroids. 
The symptoms are heavy bleeding with
cramping. Slight blood loss with severe
pain can be a symptom of either a threat-
ened miscarriage or ectopic pregnancy. 
Miscarriages are classified medically
as different types of abortion. In a
threatened abortion, the fetus remains
alive in the uterus. In an inevitable
abortion, the fetus dies and is expelled
from the uterus. In a missed abortion,
the fetus dies but remains in the uterus.
A  pelvic examination and  ultrasound
scanning may be performed to assess
the pregnancy. If all of the contents of
the uterus are expelled, no further treat-
ment may be necessary. Otherwise, a D
and C may be performed. Missed abor-
tion requires a D and C or  induction of
labour depending on the duration of the
pregnancy. Rh-negative women are
given anti-D (Rho) immunoglobulin to
prevent complications related to Rhesus
incompatibility in future pregnancies.
(See also abortion.)
misoprostol A synthetic  prostaglandin
drug that inhibits gastric secretion. Miso-
prostol is used to prevent and treat
peptic ulcers associated with use of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. 
mites and disease Mites are small ani-
mals, usually less than 1.2 mm, with 8
legs. Many species have piercing and
blood-sucking mouthparts. 
Species causing disorders include the
scabies mite, which burrows in human
skin causing intense itching; the house-
dust mite, which can cause  asthma
when inhaled in dust; and chiggers
(American harvest mites), which are
found in thick grass and cause an itchy
rash when they bite. Mites in grain or
fruit may cause skin irritation, some-
times known as grocers＊ or bakers＊ itch.
Certain mites transmit diseases, partic-
ularly scrub typhus and rickettsial pox.
mitochondria Small organelles that are
found inside cells, in which cell respira-
tion takes place. The mitochondrial wall
consists of 2 membranes, and the inner
one is highly foldedto provide a surface
for the respiration reactions. Cells that
use a lot of energy, such as muscle
cells, contain many mitochondria. 
mitochondrialDNA Mitochondria have
their own DNA. In human mitochondria,
the DNA is a double-helical circle that
codes for 13 proteins. Mitochondria
have a distinctive genetic code, and
their genomes are not changed by
meiosis during reproduction, making
the DNA useful in genetic studies. 
The significance of mitochondria hav-
ing their own DNA is that diseases can
be inherited via abnormalities of mito-
chondrial DNA, and inheritance of the
DNA is maternal, directly from the egg. 
mitosis A type of cell division in which
the chromosomes within the nucleus of
a cell are exactly duplicated into each of
2 daughter cells. 
Before cell division, the chromosomes
duplicate themselves and coil up with
the 2 copies joined together. The dou-
bled chromosomes line up in the centre
of the cell and are pulled apart to oppo-
site ends of the cell, which then divides.
Each daughter cell therefore has the
same chromosome content as the origi-
nal cell. (See also meiosis.)
mitral incompetence Failure of the
mitral valve of the heart to close properly,
allowing blood to leak back into the left
atrium (upper chamber) when pumped
out of the left ventricle (lower cham-
ber). The disorder, which is also known
as mitral regurgitation, may occur in
conjunction with mitral stenosis.
Symptoms include increasing breath-
lessness and fatigue, sometimes with
palpitations. Later, the ankles may swell. 
Diagnosis may be made by hearing a
characteristic heart murmur, and from
chest X-rays, ECG, and echocardiography.
Cardiac catheterization may also be per-
formed. Treatment may include  diuretic
drugs, vasodilator drugs, and anticoagu-
lant drugs. If symptoms are disabling,
heart-valve surgery may be considered. 
MISOPROSTOL MITRAL INCOMPETENCE
MBefore dental or other surgery, patients
with mitral incompetence are given
antibiotic drugs to prevent endocarditis.
mitral stenosis Narrowing of the open-
ing of the mitral valve in the heart. The
left atrium (upper chamber) has to work
harder to force blood through the nar-
rowed valve. Mitral stenosis is more
common in women and may be accom-
panied by mitral incompetence. Stenosis
is usually due to damage to the valve
caused by rheumatic fever. 
The main symptom is breathlessness
on exertion. As mitral stenosis worsens,
breathing difficulty eventually occurs
when at rest. Other signs include palpi-
tations,  atrial fibrillation, and flushed
cheeks. There may also be coughing up
of blood and fatigue. Possible compli-
cations are as for mitral incompetence. 
A diagnosis is made from the patient＊s
history, listening to heart sounds, and
by investigations such as an ECG, chest
X-rays,  echocardiography, and cardiac
catheterization.Drug treatment is broad-
ly the same as for mitral incompetence. 
If symptoms persist, balloon  valvulo-
plasty may be carried out to stretch the
valve. Alternatively,  heart-valve surgery
may be performed to replace the valve.
mitral valve A valve in the left side of
the heart. The mitral valve is made up of
2 flaps, which allows one-way blood
flow from the left
atrium into the left
ventricle.
mitral valve pro-
lapse A common,
slight deformity of
the  mitralvalve, 
in the left side of
the heart, that can
producea degree
of mitral incompet-
ence. The prolapse
is most common in
women and causes
a heart murmur. It
maybe inherited,
but the cause is
often unknown.
Usually, there are no symptoms, and
treatment is not needed. Occasionally,
the condition may produce chest pain,
arrhythmia, or, rarely, heart failure. Often,
373
no treatment is required for mitral valve
prolapse, but some people may be
treated with beta-blocker drugs, diuretic
drugs,  antiarrhythmic drugs, or, rarely,
heart-valve surgery.
mittelschmerz Lower abdominal pain
that some women have at the time of
ovulation. The pain is usually one-sided
and lasts only a few hours. It may be
accompanied by slight vaginal blood
loss. In cases of severe mittelschmerz,
oral contraceptives may be prescribed to
suppress ovulation. 
MMR vaccination Administration of a
combined vaccine that gives protection
against  measles,  mumps, and  rubella.
The vaccination is offered to all children
at 12每15 months of age, with a booster
shot at 3每5 years. Vaccination is post-
poned if a child is feverish, and it is not
given to children with untreated cancer
or allergies to aminoglycoside antibiotic
drugs such as neomycin.
Mild fever, rash, and malaise may
occur after vaccination. In 1 per cent 
of cases, mild, noninfectious swelling of
the  parotid glands develops 3每4 weeks
after vaccination. There is no evidence
for a link between MMR and  Crohn's
disease or autism. 
mobilization The process of making a
part of the body capable of movement.
Mobilization refers to treatment that is
designed to increase mobility in a part
of the body recovering from injury or
affected by disease.
Surgeons use the term to refer to the
freeing of an organ or structure from sur-
rounding connective tissue  and fibrous
adhesions (bands of tissue joining nor-
mally unconnected parts of the body).
moclobemide An  antidepressant drug
used to treat severe resistant depres-
sion and social phobia. Moclobemideis
a reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor
and is lesslikely than other MAOIs to
cause high blood pressure. But, as with
all MAOIs, dietary restrictions still apply.
molar See teeth.
molar pregnancy A pregnancy in
which a tumour develops from the pla-
cental tissue and the embryo does not
develop normally. A molar pregnancy
may be noncancerous (a  hydatidiform
mole) or may invade the wall of the
MOLAR PREGNANCY MITRAL STENOSIS
M
Mitral valve
MITRAL VALVE
Left
atrium
STRUCTURE OF HEART 
Left
ventricleuterus (an invasive mole). A molar preg-
nancy that becomes cancerous is called
a choriocarcinoma.
If the dead embryo and placenta are
not expelled from the uterus after a mis-
carriage, the dead tissue is called a
carneous mole. 
mole A type of pigmented naevus. (See
also molar pregnancy.)
molecule The smallest complete unit of
a substance that can exist independ-
ently and still retain the characteristic
properties of that substance. Almost all
molecules consist of 2 or more atoms
that are bonded together. Molecules
that consist of only one atom are known
as monatomic molecules.
molluscum contagiosum A harmless
viral infection characterized by shiny,
pearly white papules (tiny lumps) on
the skin surface. Each papule has a cen-
tral depression, and produces a cheesy
fluid when it is squeezed. A crust forms
before healing occurs.
The papules often appear on the geni-
tals, the inside of the thighs, or the face.
Children are more commonly affected
than adults. The infection is transmit-
ted by direct skin contact or during
sexual intercourse; it usually clears up
within a few months, but may last for
up to 18 months.
Mongolian blue spot A blue-black
pigmented spot found on the lower
back and buttocks at birth. The spots
are a type of naevus and are caused by a
concentration of melanocytes (pigment-
producing cells). Mongolian blue spots
are commonly found in black or Asian
children, and they usually disappear by
the age of 3每4 years.
374
Mongolism An outdated name for
Down＊s syndrome.
moniliasis See candidiasis.
monitor To maintain a constant watch
on the condition of a patient. Also, any
device used to carry out monitoring. 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors Also
known as MAOIs, one of the 3 main
types of antidepressant drug. They work
by preventing the breakdown of certain
neurotransmitters by the enzyme mono-
amine oxidase. The increased levels of
neurotransmitters that result are asso-
ciated with improved mood. Common
drugs include phenelzine and isocarbox-
azid. All MAOIs interact with certain
other drugs and foods such as cheese
and red wine; but moclobemide is known
as a reversible MAOI, which makes the
adverse reactions less likely to occur.
monoarthritis Inflammation of a single
joint, causing pain and stiffness. Com-
mon causes of monoarthritis include
osteoarthritis, gout, and infection.
monoclonal antibody See  antibody,
monoclonal.
monocyte One of the main types of
white blood cell. Monocytes are phago-
cytes, and play an important role in the
immune system.
mononucleosis, infectious An acute
viral infection characterized by a high
temperature, sore throat, and swollen
lymph nodes, particularly in the neck. 
Commonly called glandular fever, it is
caused by the  Epstein每Barr virus and 
is most common during adolescence or
early adulthood. One common mode of
transmission is thought to be kissing.
In the body, the virus multiplies in the
lymphocytes (also called mononuclear
cells), which develop an atypical appear-
ance. The first symptoms are a fever and
headache, followed by swollen  lymph
nodesand a severe  sore throat. Rarely,
enlargement of the tonsils may obstruct
breathing. Mild inflammation of the
liver may occur, leading to jaundice. 
Diagnosis is often made from the symp-
toms and a blood test. Recovery usually
takes 4每6 weeks, with rest the only
treatment needed. In rare cases, cortico-
steroid drugs are given to reduce severe
inflammation, particularly if breathing
is obstructed. For 2每3 months after
MOLE MONONUCLEOSIS, INFECTIOUS
M
MOLLUSCUM CONTAGIOSUM
Pearly white papulerecovery, patients often feel depressed,
lack energy, and have daytime sleepiness.
monorchism The presence of only one
testis. The most probable causes are
surgery (see orchidectomy) and congen-
ital absence of the testis.
monosodium glutamate A  food addi-
tive that is used as a flavour enhancer
and seasoning. Monosodium glutamate
(MSG) is the sodium salt of an  amino
acid. A short-lived illness involving pain
in the neck and chest, palpitations, feel-
ing hot, and a headache may occur in
some people after eating food to which
large amounts of MSG have been added.
mons pubis The rounded swelling over
the front of the  pubicbone. The mons
pubis, which becomes covered with hair
at puberty, is formed by a pad of fatty
tissue under the skin.
Monteggia＊s fracture Fracture of the
ulna just below the elbow, with disloca-
tion of the radius from the elbow joint.
montelukast A specific  leukotriene re-
ceptor antagonist drug that is used in
the management of asthma. It is not
used to treat acute attacks.
mood disorders Disorders in which the
emotions are affected: mania, depression,
and manic每depressive illness.
moon face Rounded facial appearance
that is a feature of Cushing＊s syndrome.
morbid anatomy Also called pathologi-
cal anatomy, the study of the structural
changes that occur in body tissues as a
result of disease, especially the changes
visible to the naked eye.
morbidity The state or condition of
being diseased. In medical statistics,
the morbidity ratio is the proportion of
diseased people to healthy people in a
particular community.
morbilli Another name for measles.
morning-after pill See  postcoital con-
traception.
morning sickness See  vomiting in
pregnancy.
morphine An opioid analgesic drug de-
rived from the opium poppy. Morphine
is given to relieve severe pain caused by
myocardial infarction, major surgery,
serious injury, and cancer. 
Morphine blocks the transmission of
pain signals at sites called opiate recep-
tors in the  brain and  spinal cord. The
375
drug also induces a sense of well-being
or euphoria. Side effects include drow-
siness, dizziness, constipation, nausea,
vomiting, and confusion. Long-term use
of morphine may lead to  drug depen-
dence, with severe flu-like symptoms
when the drug is withdrawn (see with-
drawal syndrome).
morphoea A condition in which one or
more hard, flat patches develop on the
skin. It is a type of  scleroderma but is
confined to the skin. Although harmless,
the condition can be disfiguring. 
mortality The death rate, which is the
number of deaths per 100,000 (or 10,000
or 1,000) of the population per year.
Mortality is often calculated for specific
groups. For example,  infant mortality
measures the deaths of live-born infants
during the 1st year of life.
Standardized mortality allows compari-
son of the death rate in, for example, an
occupational or socioeconomic group
with that for the entire population. (See
also life expectancy; maternal mortality.)
morula A stage in the development of
an  embryo after  fertilization. The fertil-
ized egg divides repeatedly as it travels
down the fallopian tube. When it forms a
ball of cells, it is called a morula. 
mosaicism The presence of 2 or more
groups of cells containing different
genetic material within one person. 
Some people with syndromes caused
by  chromosomal abnormalities (such as
Down＊s syndrome and  Turner＊s syn-
drome) have mosaicism. Depending on
the proportion of abnormal cells and
the type of abnormality, they range from
looking physically normal to having fea-
tures typical of the syndrome. 
mosquito bites Mosquitoes are flying
insects found throughout the world.
The females bite humans or animals to
obtain blood, which they need to pro-
duce eggs. The males do not bite. A
doctor should be consulted if there is a
severe skin reaction to a mosquito bite.
As well as being irritating, mosquito
bites can also transmit diseases. The
main disease-transmitting mosquitoes
belongto 3  groups:  ANOPHELES (which
transmits malaria), AEDES (which carries
yellow fever), and  CULEX (which trans-
mits filariasis).
MOSQUITO BITES MONORCHISM
M376
Preventive measures should be taken in
any area where mosquitoes are ram-
pant. The most effective measures are
wearing long sleeves and socks, placing
mosquito screens over windows, and
using insect-repellent sprays or slow-
burning coils that release insecticidal
smoke. Mosquito nets should be placed
over beds. (See also  insect bites; insects
and disease.)
motion sickness A condition that some
people experience during road, sea, 
or air travel. Symptoms range from un-
easiness and headache to distress,
excessive sweating and salivation, pal-
lor, nausea, and vomiting.
Motion sickness is caused by the effect
of repetitive movement on the organ of
balance in the inner ear. Factors such as
anxiety, a fume-laden atmosphere, or
the sight of food may make the condi-
tion worse. So, too, can focusing on
nearby objects; sufferers should look at
a point on the horizon.
Motion sickness may be prevented or
controlled by  antiemetic drugs or by
acupressure bands worn on the wrist.
motor A term used to describe anything
that brings about movement, such as a
muscle or a nerve. 
motor neuron disease A group of dis-
orders in which there is degeneration 
of the nerves in the central nervous sys-
tem that control muscular activity. This
causes weakness and wasting of the
muscles. The cause is unknown.
The most common type of motor neu-
ron disease is amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS or Lou Gehrig＊s disease).
It usually affects people over the age of
50 and is more common in men. Some
cases run in families. Usually, symp-
toms start with weakness in the hands
and arms or legs, and muscle wasting.
There may be irregular muscle contrac-
tions, and muscle cramps or stiffness.
All four extremities are soon affected. 
Progressive muscular atrophy and pro-
gressive bulbar palsy both start with
patterns of muscle weakness different
from ALS but usually develop into ALS.
There are 2 types of motor neuron dis-
ease that first appear in childhood or
adolescence. In most cases, these con-
ditions are inherited. Werdnig每Hoffman
disease affects infants at birth or soon
afterwards. In almost all cases, progres-
sive muscle weakness leads to death
within several years. Chronic spinal
muscular atrophy begins in childhood or
adolescence, causing progressive weak-
ness but not always serious disability.
There are no specific tests for motor
neuron disease. Diagnosis is based on
careful clinical examination by a neurol-
ogist. Tests including  EMG, muscle
biopsy,  blood tests,  myelography,  CT
scanning, or MRI may be performed.
The disease typically goes on to affect
the muscles involved in breathing and
swallowing, leading to death within 2每4
years. However, about 10 per cent of
sufferers survive for 10 years.
Nerve degeneration cannot be slowed
down, but physiotherapy and the use of
various aids may help to reduce dis-
ability. The drug riluzole is used to
extend life (or the time until mechanical
ventilation is required).
mould Any of a large group of fungi that
exist as many-celled, filamentous col-
onies. Some moulds are the source of
antibiotic drugs. Others can cause dis-
eases such as aspergillosis.
mountain sickness An illness that can
affect people who have ascended rapidly
to heights above 2,400m每3,000m. Moun-
tain sickness is caused by the reduced
atmospheric pressure and oxygen levels
that occur at high altitude. 
mouth The oral cavity, which breaks
food down for swallowing (see  masti-
cation) and is used in breathing. In
addition, it helps to convert sound
vibrations from the larynx into speech.
mouth cancer Forms of cancerous
tumour that affect the lips, tongue, and
oral cavity. Lip cancer and tongue can-
cer are the most common types. 
Predisposing causes of mouth cancer
are poor oral hygiene, drinking alcoholic
spirits,tobacco-smoking, chewing tob-
acco, and inhaling snuff. Irritation from
ill-fitting dentures or jagged teeth are
other factors. Men are affected twice as
often as women; most cases occur in
men over the age of 40.
Mouth cancer usually begins with 
a whitish patch, called  leukoplakia, or a
small lump. These may cause a burning
MOTION SICKNESS MOUTH CANCER
M377
sensation, but are usually painless. As
the tumour grows, it may develop into
an  ulcer or a deep fissure, which may
bleed and erode surrounding tissue. 
Diagnosis is based on a biopsy. Treat-
ment consists of surgery,  radiotherapy,
or both. Extensive surgery may cause
facial disfigurement and problems with
eating and speaking, which may require
reconstructive surgery. Radiotherapy
sometimes damages the salivary glands
(see mouth, dry).
When mouth cancer is detected and
treated early, the outlook is good. 
mouth, dry The result of inadequate
production of saliva. Dry mouth is usu-
ally a temporary condition caused by
fear, infection of a salivary gland, or the
action of anticholinergic drugs.
Rarely, permanent dry mouth may
occur as part of  Sj?gren＊s syndrome  or
from radiotherapy to treat mouth cancer.
Dryness usually causes difficulty in
swallowing and speaking, interference
with taste, and tooth decay (see caries,
dental). It may be relieved by spraying the
inside of the mouth with artificial saliva.
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation See
artificial respiration.
mouth ulcer An open sore caused by a
break in the  mucous membrane lining
the mouth. The ulcers are white, grey, or
yellow spots with an inflamed border.
The most common types are aphthous
ulcers (see  ulcer, aphthous) and ulcers
caused by the herpes simplex  virus. A
mouth ulcer may be an early stage of
mouth cancer and may need to be
investigated with a  biopsy if it fails to
heal within a month. 
mouthwash A solution for rinsing the
mouth. Many only leave the mouth feel-
ing fresh and remove loose food debris
from the teeth. Some, such as those con-
taining hydrogen peroxide, can help to
clean the teeth if the gums are too tender
for proper toothbrushing, as in some
types of gingivitis. Those containing
chlorhexidine are effective against plaque
when routine dental hygiene is impossi-
ble.  Fluoride  mouthwashes help to
prevent tooth decay (see caries, dental),
and a mouthwash of warm salt water
can help to ease painful inflammation
caused by tooth disorders.  Antiseptic
mouthwashes  intended to combat hali-
tosis are usually ineffective because they
do not treat the cause of the problem.
movement Bodily movements include
skeletal movements and movements of
soft tissues and body organs. All move-
ment is brought about by the actions of
muscles and may be voluntary, involun-
tary, or a reflex action.
All voluntary skeletal movements are
initiated in the part of the cerebrum
(main mass of the  brain) called the
motor cortex. Signals are sent down the
spinal cord along nerve fibres, and from
there along separate nerve fibres to the
appropriate muscles. Control relies on
information supplied by sensory nerve
receptors, in the muscles and else-
where, that record the position of the
different parts of the body and the
amount of contraction in each muscle.
This information is integrated in spe-
cific regions of the brain (including the
cerebellum and basal ganglia) that con-
trol the coordination, initiation, and
cessation of movement. 
Skeletal movements can also occur as
simple reflexes in response to certain
sensory warning signals; the movement
is automatic and less controlled, involv-
ing far fewer nerve connections.
Some body movements do not involve
the skeleton. For example, eye and
tongue movements are brought about
by contractions of muscles that are
attached to soft tissues. These move-
ments may be voluntary or reflex. 
Movements of the internal organs are
involuntary; they include the  heartbeat
and peristalsis.
moxibustion A form of treatment, often
used in conjunction with  acupuncture,
in which a cone of wormwood leaves
(moxa) or certain other plant materials
is burned just above the skin to relieve
internal pain.
moxisylyte A  vasodilator drug used in
the treatment of Raynaud＊s disease. Side
effects include nausea, diarrhoea, hot
flushes, headache, and dizziness.
MRI The abbreviation for magnetic res-
onance imaging. MRI is a diagnostic
technique that produces cross-sectional
or 3-dimensional images of organs and
other body structures.
MRI MOUTH, DRY
M378
The patient lies inside a scanner sur-
rounded by a large, powerful magnet. A
receiving magnet is then placed around
the part of the body to be investigated.
If large areas, such as the abdomen, are
to be imaged, the receiving magnet is
fitted inside the scanner; for a smaller
area, such as a joint, a magnet may be
placed around the part to be scanned.
The scanner generates a strong mag-
netic field, which causes the atoms in
the body to line up parallel to each
other. Short pulses of radio waves from
a radiofrequency source briefly knock the
atoms out of alignment. As the atoms
realign they emit tiny signals, which are
detected by the receiving magnet. Infor-
mation about these signals is passed to
a computer, which builds up an image
based on the signals＊ strength and loca-
tion. MRI images can be enhanced by
use of a  contrast medium to highlight
particular body structures, such as
tumours and blood vessels.
Images from MRI are similar to those
produced by  CT scanning but give
greater contrast between normal and
abnormal tissues. MRI is useful in
studying the brain and spinal cord, the
internal structure of the eye and ear, the
internal organs, and blood flow.
There are no known risks or side effects.
The technique does not use ionizing
radiation and can be performed repeat-
edly, but the scanner may interfere with
the functioning of pacemakers, hearing
aids, and other electrical devices. 
MRSA The abbreviation for methicillin-
resistant  STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS, a
bacterium resistant to methicillin and
many other  antibiotic drugs. MRSA is
responsible for the emergence of infec-
tions in hospitals that are difficult to
treat and can sometimes be fatal.
MS The abbreviation for the disorder
multiple sclerosis.
MSG The abbreviation for the food
additive monosodium glutamate.
MSU The abbreviation for midstream
specimen of urine: a specimen of urine
to be examined for the presence of
microorganisms. The initial part of the
stream is not collected, in order to
avoid bacterial contamination of the
specimen from the skin or the lining of
the lower urinary tract.
mucocele A swollen sac or cavity within
the body that is filled with  mucus
secreted by its inner lining. 
mucolytic drugs Drugs that make spu-
tum (phlegm) less sticky and easier to
cough up. An example is acetylcysteine. 
MRSA MUCOLYTIC DRUGS
M
MRI
MRI scanner 
Control
panel 
Motorized
bed moves
patient into
scanner
Receiving magnet 
picks up signals
produced by body in
response to radio waves
Powerful magnet
creates magnetic
field
Radiofrequency source
emits pulses of radio waves
Companion to
reassure patient379
mucopolysaccharidosis A group of rare
inherited metabolic disorders (see met-
abolism, inborn errors of) of which
Hurler＊s syndrome is the best known. All
mucopolysaccharidoses are genetic dis-
orders in which there is an abnormality
of a specific  enzyme. This leads to the
accumulation within body cells of sub-
stances called mucopolysaccharides. 
Features may include abnormalities of
the skeleton and/or the central nervous
system, with  learning difficulties and, 
in some  cases, a characteristic facial
appearance. There may also be clouding
of the  cornea, liver enlargement, and
joint stiffness. No specific treatment is
available. However, a  bone marrow
transplant may successfully be used to
treat Hurler＊s syndrome.
Mild forms of mucopolysaccharidoses
allow a child to have a relatively normal
life. More severe types usually cause
death during childhood or adolescence. 
mucosa A term for mucous membrane.
mucous membrane The soft, pink,
skin-like layer that lines many of the
cavities and tubes in the body, including
the  respiratory tract and the  digestive
tract. Mucous membranes contain mil-
lions of cells called goblet cells, which
secrete a fluid containing mucus.
mucoviscidosis See cystic fibrosis.
mucus The thick, slimy fluid secreted by
mucous membranes. Mucus moistens,
lubricates, and protects parts of the body
lined by mucous membranes, such as
the digestive and respiratory tracts. 
mucus method of contraception
See contraception, natural methods of.
multiple myeloma Also called myelo-
matosis, multiple myeloma is a rare,
cancerous condition in which plasma
cells in the  bone marrow proliferate
uncontrollably and function incorrectly.
It occurs in middle- to old age. 
Plasma cells are a type of B-lymphocyte
that produce  immunoglobulins, which
help protect against infection. In multi-
ple myeloma, the  proliferating  plasma
cells produce excessive amountsof one
type of immunoglobulin, while produc-
tion of other types is impaired. This
makes infection more likely.
Proliferation of the abnormal cells
causes pain and destroys bone tissue.
Affected  vertebrae may collapse and
compress nerves, causing numbness or
paralysis. Blood calcium levels increase
as bone is destroyed, as may the level
of one or more immunoglobulins.
These changes in the blood may dam-
age the kidneys, leading to  kidney
failure. There may also be anaemia and
a tendency for abnormal bleeding.
The disease is diagnosed by a  bone
marrow biopsy, by blood tests or urinal-
ysis, and by X-rays. Treatment includes
the use of anticancer drugs, radiothera-
py, and supportive measures, including
blood transfusions, antibiotic drugs, and
analgesic drugs.
multiple personality A rare disorder
in which a person has 2 or more distinct
personalities, each of which dominates
at different times. The personalities are
usually very different from each other.
multiple pregnancy See  pregnancy,
multiple.
multiple sclerosis A progressive dis-
ease of the central  nervous system in
which patches of  myelin in the brain
and spinal cord are destroyed. Multiple
sclerosis (or MS) is an autoimmune dis-
order, in which the immune system
attacks the myelin sheath that covers
some nerves in the brain and spinal
cord. Affected nerves cannot conduct
nerve impulses, so functions such as
movement and sensation may be lost.
Any area of the body can be affected.
Symptoms range from numbness and
tingling to paralysis and incontinence. 
Attacks of symptoms are followed by a
variable period of remission, in which
dramatic improvements may be made.
Women are more likely to develop MS
than men, and there may be a genetic
factor, as the disease sometimes runs in
families. There may also be an environ-
mental factor, as MS is more common
in temperate zones than in the tropics. 
Symptoms usually develop early in
adulthood. Spinal cord damage may
cause tingling, numbness, weakness in
the extremities, spasticity, paralysis, and
incontinence. Damage to white matter
(myelinated nerves) in the brain may
cause fatigue, vertigo, clumsiness, muscle
weakness, slurred speech, blurred vision,
numbness, weakness, or facial pain.
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS
MAttacks may last several months. After a
variable remission period, a relapse
occurs, which may be precipitated by
injury, infection, or stress. Some people
have mild relapses and long periods of
remission, with few permanent effects.
Some people become gradually more
disabled from the first attack. A few suf-
fer gross disability within the 1st year.
There is no single diagnostic test, but
MRI may show damage to white matter
in the brain.  Evoked response tests on
the eyes also provide strong evidence.
There is no specific treatment. Some
people claim that dietary modifications
such as sunflower or evening primrose
oils are beneficial. In some cases, inter-
feron beta can extend the time between
attacks and reduce the rate of decline.
multivitamins Over-the-counter prepa-
rations, containing a combination of
vitamins, that are used as a dietary sup-
plement. (See vitamin supplements.)
mumps An acute viral illness, mainly of
childhood. The main symptom is in-
flammation and swelling of one or both
of the parotid glands situated inside the
angle of the jaw. One attack of mumps
confers lifelong immunity. Since routine
MMR vaccination, epidemics of mumps
no longer occur. 
The mumps virus is spread in airborne
droplets. The  incubation period is 2每3
weeks; an affected person is infectious
for about a week before and up to 2
weeks after symptoms appear. 
Infected children often have no symp-
toms, or they may feel slightly unwell
and have some discomfort around the
parotid glands. In more serious cases,
there is pain around the glands and
chewing becomes difficult; one or both
glands then become swollen, painful,
and tender. A fever and headache may
develop. The swelling subsides within a
week to 10 days. When only one gland is
affected, the second often swells as the
first gland＊s swelling subsides. Complica-
tions of mumps include viral meningitis,
pancreatitis, and epididymo-orchitis.
Diagnosis is usually made from the
symptoms. There is no specific treatment.
Munchausen＊s syndrome A chronic
factitious disorder in which the sufferer
complains of physical symptoms that
are pretended or self-induced in order
to play the role of patient. Most afflict-
ed people are repeatedly hospitalized.
The usual complaints are abdominal
pain, bleeding, neurological symptoms,
rashes, and fever. Sufferers typically
invent dramatic histories and behave
disruptively in hospital. Many have
detailed medical knowledge and scars
from self-injury or previous treatment.
In Munchausen＊s syndrome by proxy,
parents cause factitious disorders in
their children. 
Treatment consists of protecting suf-
ferers from unnecessary operations and
drug treatments.
mupirocin A topical antibacterial cream
or ointment used to treat skin infec-
tions such as impetigo. 
murmur A sound caused by turbulent
blood flow through the heart, as heard
through a stethoscope. 
Heart murmurs are regarded as an
indication of possible abnormality in
the blood flow. Apart from ※innocent§
murmurs, the most common cause of
extra blood turbulence is a disorder 
of the  heart valves. Murmurs can also
be caused by some types of congenital
heart disease (see  heart disease, con-
genital) or by rarer conditions such as a
myxoma in a heart chamber.
muscle A structure composed of bun-
dles of specialized cells capable of
contraction and relaxation to create
movement. There are 3 types of muscle:
skeletal, smooth, and cardiac.
The skeletal muscles are the most
prominent in the body (see  muscular
system). They are called voluntary mus-
cles because they are under conscious
control. Skeletal muscles are composed
of groups of muscle fibres arranged in
bundles called fascicles. A fibre is made
up of longitudinal units called myofib-
rils, the working units of which are
filaments of actin and myosin (two pro-
teins that control contraction). A state of
partial contraction is constantly main-
tained 每 this is muscle tone.
Smooth muscle is concerned with the
movements of internal organs. It is not
under conscious control; for this rea-
son, it is also called involuntary muscle.
Smooth muscle is made up of long,
380
MULTIVITAMINS MUSCLE
M381
spindle-shaped cells, and contracts with
the same sliding action of actin and
myosin as skeletal muscle. This type of
muscle is stimulated by the  autonomic
nervous system; it also responds to hor-
mones and to levels of chemicals in
fluid around the muscle.
Cardiac muscle (also called myocar-
dium) is found only in the  heart. It is
able to contract rhythmically about
100,000 times a day, and has a similar
structure to that of skeletal muscle.
Contraction is stimulated by the auto-
nomic nervous system, by hormones,
and by the stretching of muscle fibres. 
The most common muscle disorders
are injury and lack of blood supply to a
muscle. Rare disorders include  mus-
cular dystrophy and myasthenia gravis.
muscle-relaxant drugs A group of
drugs used to relieve muscle spasm and
spasticity. Muscle-relaxant drugs are used
mainly in the treatment of nervous-
system disorders such as multiple scle-
rosis and painful muscular conditions
such as torticollis. They are occasionally
used to relieve muscle rigidity caused
by injury. Some types are used to cause
temporary paralysis during surgery
under general anaesthesia.
Except for dantrolene, muscle-relaxant
drugs partly block nerve signals that
stimulate muscle contraction. Dantrol-
ene interferes with the chemical activity
in muscle cells needed for contraction.
The drugs may cause muscle weakness
and drowsiness. In rare cases, dantro-
lene causes liver damage.
muscle spasm Sudden and involuntary
contraction of a muscle. Muscle spasm
is a normal reaction to pain and inflam-
mation around a joint. Common causes
are muscle  strain,  disc prolapse, and
stress. Usually, the cause of the spasm
is treated.  Muscle-relaxant drugs may
also be needed. (See also spasticity.)
muscular dystrophy A group of rare
inherited muscle disorders which cause
slow, progressive wasting away of mus-
cle fibres. This degeneration may lead
to disability and death. 
The most common and severe form of
muscular dystrophy is Duchenne mus-
cular dystrophy. This is caused by a
recessive gene carried on the X chromo-
some (see  sex-linked inheritance). Boys
only have one X chromosome, so if they
inherit a copy of the defective gene
from their mother they develop the dis-
order. Girls (with two X chromosomes)
are not affected but become carriers of
the defective gene.Affected boys walk
with a waddle, find climbing difficult,
and may have curvature of the spine. The
disorder progresses rapidly:the ability
to walk is lost by the age of 12, and few
boys survive beyond the teenage years. 
Becker＊s muscular dystrophy starts
later in childhood and progresses more
slowly. Myotonic dystrophy affects the
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY MUSCLE-RELAXANT DRUGS
M
MUSCLE
MUSCLE FIBRES MYOFIBRIL
Thin
myofilament
Thick myofilament
Muscle
fibre
Blood vessel
Myofibril
SECTION OF SKELETAL MUSCLE
Fascicle
Muscle fibresheel  tendons may assist walking in
some cases. The long-term outlook
depends on the particular form.
Families in which a child or adult has
developed any form of muscular dystro-
phy should receive genetic counselling.
muscular system The muscles of the
body that are attached to the  skeleton.
These muscles are responsible for vol-
untary movement, and also support and
stabilize the skeleton. In most cases, a
muscle attaches to a bone (usually by
means of a  tendon) and crosses over a
joint to attach to another bone. Muscles
can produce movement by contracting
and shortening to pull on the bone 
to which they are attached. They can
only pull, not push, and are therefore
muscles of the hands, face, neck, and
feet, and causes  learning difficulties.
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy mainly
affects muscles in the hips and shoul-
ders, and facioscapulohumeral muscular
dystrophy affects muscles in the upper
arms, shoulder girdle, and face. In this
last form, severe disability is rare. 
A diagnosis for Duchenne muscular
dystrophy can be made with gene test-
ing before symptoms develop. Once
muscle weakness develops other tests
become useful, including measurement
of muscle enzymes and an EMG.
There is no cure, and physiotherapy is
the main treatment. Remaining as
active as possible keeps healthy mus-
cles in good condition. Surgery to the
MUSCULAR SYSTEM
382
MUSCULAR SYSTEM MUSCULAR SYSTEM
M
FRONT VIEW 
Trapezius
Splenius of head
Semispinalis of head
Deltoid
Triceps
of arm
Extensor
of fingers
Gluteus
maximus
Biceps of
thigh
Soleus
Achilles
tendon
Short
extensor
of toes
Long flexor
of toe
Erector
of spine
Gluteus
minimus
Quadrate
of thigh
Great
Adductor
Orbicular
of eye
Platysma
Ulnar
extensor
of wrist
Infraspinous
Semi-
membranous
Temporoparietal
Sternocleidomastoid
Biceps
of arm
Rectus of
abdomen
External
oblique of
abdomen
Sartorius
Rectus
of thigh
Medial
vastus
Dorsal
interosseous
of foot
Abductor of
great toe
Anterior
tibial
Internal
oblique of
abdomen
Short extensor
of great toe
Gracilis
Smaller
pectoral
External
intercostal
Internal
intercostal
Greater
pectoral
Deltoid
Iliopsoas
Gastrocnemius
Occipitofrontal
Deep 
flexor of
fingers
BACK VIEW 383
arranged so that the pull of one muscle
or group of muscles is opposed to
another, enabling a movement to be
reversed. Although most actions of the
skeletal muscles are under conscious
control,  reflex movements of certain
muscles occur in response to stimuli.
There are more than 600 muscles in
the body, classified according to the
type of movement they produce. An
extensor opens out a joint, a flexor closes
it; an adductor draws a part of the body
inwards, an abductor moves it out-
wards; a levator raises it, a depressor
lowers it; and constrictor or sphincter
muscles surround and close orifices.
musculoskeletal Relating to muscle
and/or bone. The musculoskeletal sys-
tem is the skeleton and the muscles
attached to it. 
mushroom poisoning There are many
species of poisonous mushrooms and
toadstools in the UK, but many of them
have an unpleasant taste and are there-
fore unlikely to be eaten in sufficient
amounts to cause problems.
Most fatal cases of mushroom poison-
ing in the UK are caused by  AMANITA
PHALLOIDES (death cap). This mushroom
can be confused with the edible field
mushroom, although it has white gills
instead of pink-brown ones.
The death cap and some related spec-
ies, such as AMANITA VIROSA (destroying
angel), contain poisons called amanitins,
which attack cells in the liver, kidneys,
and small intestine. Symptoms such as
severe abdominal pain, vomiting, and
diarrhoea usually develop 8每14 hours
after eating the mushrooms. Later, there
may be liver enlargement and  jaundice,
which may lead to death from  liver fail-
ure. There is no antidote, and treatment
consists of  supportive measures only.
For those people who survive, recovery
usually occurs after about 1 week.
AMANITA MUSCARIA (fly agaric) has a red
cap flecked with white. Symptoms of
poisoning appear within 20 minutes to
2 hours, and may include drowsiness,
visual disturbances,  delirium, muscle
tremors, and nausea and vomiting. Treat-
ment of this type of poisoning (and of
other types with rapidly developing
symptoms) is with gastric lavage (see
lavage, gastric) and activated charcoal.
Recovery usually occurs within 24 hours.
※Magic§ mushrooms contain the hallu-
cinogen  psilocybin. These mushrooms
may also cause high fever in children.
The effects usually last for 4每 6 hours.
mutagen Any agent that increases the
rate of  mutation in cells. The main
mutagens are ionizing  radiation (see
radiation hazards), some chemicals, and
certain illnesses. 
mutation A change in a cell＊s  DNA.
Many mutations are harmless; however,
some are harmful, giving rise to cancers,
birth defects, and hereditary diseases.
Very rarely, a mutation may be beneficial.
A mutation results from a fault in the
replication of DNA when a cell divides.
A daughter cell inherits some faulty
DNA, and the fault is copied each time
the new cell divides, creating a cell pop-
ulation containing the altered DNA.
Some mutations occur by chance. Any
agent that makes mutations more likely
is called a mutagen.
There are several types of mutation.
Point mutations affect only one  gene
and may lead to the production of de-
fective  enzymes or other proteins. In
other mutations, chromosomes (or parts
of them) are deleted, added, or rear-
ranged. This type may produce greater
disruptive effects than point mutations.
If a mutated cell is a somatic (body)
cell, it can, at worst, multiply to form a
group of abnormal cells. These cells
often die out, are destroyed by the
body＊s  immune system, or have only a
minor effect. Sometimes, however, they
may become a tumour.
A mutation in a  germ cell (immature
egg or sperm) may be passed on to a
child, who then has the mutation in all
of his or her cells. This may cause an
obvious birth defect or an abnormality
in body chemistry. The mutation may
also be passed on to the child＊s des-
cendants.  Genetic disorders (such as
haemophilia and  achondroplasia) stem
from point mutations that occurred in
the germ cell of a parent, grandparent,
or more distant ancestor. Chromosomal
abnormalities (such as Down＊s syndrome)
are generally due to mutations in the
formation of parental eggs or sperm.
MUTATION MUSCULOSKELETAL
M384
mutism Refusal or inability to speak.
Mutism may occur as a symptom of
profound congenital  deafness, severe
manic每depressive illness, catatonic  schiz-
ophrenia, or a rare form of  conversion
disorder. The term may also apply to a
religious vow of silence.
Elective mutism is a rare childhood
disorder (usually starting before age 5),
in which the child can speak properly
but refuses to do so most of the time. 
Akinetic mutism describes a state of
passivity caused by some brain tumours
or by hydrocephalus. People with akin-
etic mutism are incontinent, require
feeding, and respond at most with a
whispered "yes" or "no".
myalgia Medical term for muscle pain. 
myalgic encephalomyelitis Also known
as ME (see chronic fatigue syndrome).
myasthenia gravis A rare disorder in
which the muscles become weak and
tire easily. The muscles of the eyes,
face, throat, and limbs are most com-
monly affected.
Myasthenia gravis is an  autoimmune
disorder. In many cases, abnormalities
in the thymus gland are present, and in
some cases a thymoma is found. Women
are affected more often than men.
The disease is extremely variable in its
effects. In most cases, it causes droop-
ing eyelids, double vision, a blank facial
expression, and a weak, hoarse, nasal
voice that is hesitant and becomes slur-
red during extended conversation. The
arm and leg muscles may also be affec-
ted. In severe cases, the respiratory
muscles may become weakened, caus-
ing breathing difficulty. 
Diagnosis of the condition is often
made by injecting the drug edrophonium
into a vein. This temporarily restores
power to the weak muscles. Blood tests
and EMG are also sometimes used. CT
scanning or MRI may also be performed
to look for a thymoma.
Treatment with drugs that facilitate
transmission of nerve impulses often
restores the patient＊s condition to near
normal. In some cases, the condition
often improves, and is sometimes cured
by thymectomy (removal of the thymus
gland). Regular exchanges of the pati-
ent＊s  plasma for fresh plasma may be
carried out in severe cases.  Cortico-
steroid drugs may be given. In a minority
of patients,  paralysis of the throat and
respiratory muscles may lead to death. 
mycetoma An uncommon tropical infec-
tion affecting skin and bone and caused
by  fungi or by actinomycetes (bacteria
that form long chain-like colonies). It
usually occurs on one limb, producing a
hard swelling and a discharge of pus.
Infections caused by actinomycetes are
treated with  antibiotic drugs. Surgical
removal of diseased tissue may be nec-
essary for a fungal infection.
mycology The study of fungi.
mycoplasma Any of a group of bacteria
that are the smallest type capable of
free existence. Mycoplasmas are about
the same size as  viruses but, unlike
viruses, they are capable of reproducing
outside living cells. One species,
MYCOPLASMA PNEUMONIAE, causes pri-
mary atypical pneumonia. 
mycosis Any disease caused by a fun-
gus. (See fungi; fungal infections.)
mycosis fungoides A rare type of lym-
phoma that primarily affects the skin of
the buttocks, back, or shoulders. The
cause of mycosis fungoides is unknown.
In its mildest form, it produces a non-
itchy, red, scaly rash, which may spread
slowly or remain unaltered for many
years. In more severe forms, thickened
patches of skin,  ulcers, and enlarged
lymph nodes may develop. 
The diagnosis is confirmed with a skin
biopsy. Treatment may include  PUVA,
radiotherapy, nitrogen mustard, anti-
cancer drugs, and corticosteroid drugs.
mydriasis Dilation (widening) of the
pupil of the eye. It occurs in the dark, if
a person is emotionally aroused, after
the use of certain eye-drops (such as
those containing  atropine), and after
consumption of alcohol.
mydriatic drugs A group of drugs
used to treat  uveitis and to dilate the
pupil during examination of the inside
of the eye and for surgery. Mydriatics
work by relaxing the circular muscles of
the  iris, causing the pupil to dilate.
Common mydriatic drugs include tropi-
camide, cyclopentolate, homatropine,
and  phenylephrine. (See also  cyclople-
gia; miotic drugs.)
MUTISM MYDRIATIC DRUGS
Mmyectomy Surgical removal of part or
all of a muscle. Myectomy may be per-
formed to treat severely injured and
infected muscles or to remove a fibroid
in an operation called a myomectomy.
myel-A prefix that denotes a relation-
ship to bone marrow (as in  multiple
myeloma) or to the spinal cord (as in
myelitis). The prefix myelo- has the
same meaning. 
myelin The fatty material made of  lipid
(fat) and protein that forms a protective
sheath around some nerve fibres and
increases the efficiency of nerve impulse
transmission. (See also demyelination.)
myelitis Inflammation of the spinal cord,
often caused by a viral infection. In trans-
verse myelitis, the spinal cord becomes
inflamed around the middle of the back.
Common symptoms are back pain and
gradual  paralysis of the legs, which, in
some cases, becomes permanent.
myelocele Another name for  myelo-
meningocele (see neural tube defect).
myelofibrosis An alternative term for
myelosclerosis.
myelography X-ray examination of the
spinal cord, nerves, and other tissues
within the spinal canal after injection of
a contrast medium (a substance that is
opaque to X-rays).
The procedure has now been replaced
by CT scanning and MRI.
myeloma, multiple See multiple myeloma.
myelomatosis See multiple myeloma.
myelomeningocele A protrusion of the
spinal cord and its meninges (protective
membranes) under the skin due to a con-
genital defect (see neural tube defect).
myelopathy Any disease or disorder of
the spinal cord.
MYELIN
myelosclerosis An increase of fibrous
tissue within the  bone marrow (also
known as myelofibrosis), in which the
marrow＊s ability to produce blood cells
is impaired. Myelosclerosis may be pri-
mary (occurring with no obvious cause)
or secondary (resulting from another
bone marrow disease). 
The main symptoms of myelosclerosis
are those of anaemia. Enlargement of the
spleen, night sweats, loss of appetite,
and weight loss also commonly occur.
In secondary myelosclerosis, the under-
lying disease may cause other symptoms.
Treatment of primary myelosclerosis
includes  blood transfusions to relieve
symptoms. A few patients may develop
acute  leukaemia. Treatment of second-
ary myelosclerosis depends on the
underlying cause.
myiasis An infestation by fly larvae,
which is primarily restricted to tropical
areas. In Africa, the tumbu fly lays eggs
on wet clothing left outside; the larvae
hatch and penetrate the skin to cause
boil-like swellings. Other flies may lay
eggs in open wounds, on the skin, or in
the ears or nose. Sometimes, larvae
penetrate deeply into the tissues. Intes-
tinal infestation can occur after eating
contaminated food. Preventative mea-
sures include keeping flies away from
food, covering open wounds, and ironing
clothes that have been dried outdoors. 
Myiasis of the skin is treated by plac-
ing drops of oil over the swelling. The
larva comes to the surface, where it can
be removed with a needle. In deeper tis-
sues, surgery may be needed. Intestinal
myiasis is treated with a laxative.
myo- A prefix denoting a relationship to
muscle (as in myocarditis).
myocardial infarction Sudden death
of part of the  heart  muscle due to a
blockage in the blood supply to the
heart. The disorder is popularly known as
a heart attack. It is usually characterized
by severe, unremitting chest pain. Myo-
cardial infarction is the most common
cause of death in developed countries.
Men are more likely to have a heart
attack than women, and smokers are at
greater risk. Other risk factors include
increased age, unhealthy diet, obesity,
and disorders such as hypertension and
385
M
Nucleus
Nerve-cell
ending
NERVE CELL
Myelin
sheath
Nerve cell body 
Axon
(nerve
fibre) 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION MYECTOMY386
diabetes mellitus. Atherosclerosis of the
coronary arteries is usually a factor.
Symptoms include sudden pain in the
centre of the chest, breathlessness,
feeling restless, clammy skin, nausea
and/or vomiting, or loss of conscious-
ness. Myocardial infarction may cause
immediate heart failure or arrhythmias.
Diagnosis is made from the patient＊s
history and tests including  ECG and
measurement of enzymes released into
the blood from damaged heart muscle. 
A myocardial infarction is a medical
emergency. Initial treatment may include
aspirin,  thrombolytic drugs,  analgesic
drugs, and  oxygen therapy.  Diuretic
drugs,  intravenous infusion of fluids,
antiarrhythmic drugs, and  beta-blocker
drugs may also be given. Electrical
defibrillation may be used to control
severe arrhythmias.
After recovery, preventive measures
such as taking more exercise, losing
weight, stopping smoking, and dietary
changes are recommended. Statin drugs
are usually given to lower blood choles-
terol; aspirin or  beta-blocker drugs  are
given to reduce the risk of further attacks.
myocarditis Inflammation of the heart
muscle, usually due to infection by the
coxsackievirus. Myocarditis is a charac-
teristic feature of rheumatic fever. 
There are often no symptoms. Rarely,
there may be a serious disturbance of
the heartbeat, breathlessness, chest
pain, and heart failure. In severe cases,
death may result from cardiac arrest. 
Myocarditis may be suspected from
the patient＊s history and from a physical
examination. An ECG will show charac-
teristic abnormalities of the heartbeat.
Diagnosis also involves  echocardio-
graphy and blood tests.
There is no specific treatment. Bed rest
is usually recommended and cortico-
steroid drugs may be prescribed. 
myoclonus Rapid and uncontrollable
jerking or spasm of one or more mus-
cles either at rest or during movement.
Myoclonus may be associated with a
muscular or nervous disorder. It also
occurs in healthy people, such as when
the limbs twitch before sleep.
myofascial pain syndrome See  tem-
poromandibular joint syndrome.
myoglobin An oxygen-carrying pigment
that is present in muscles. It consists of
a combination of iron and protein. Myo-
globin stores oxygen, releasing it when
it is needed by the muscles. The pres-
ence of myoglobin in the urine is known
as myoglobinuria. Slight myoglobinuria
may occur during prolonged exercise.
Severe myoglobinuria is usually caused
by the release of myoglobin from a
large area of damaged muscle, and may
cause kidney failure.
myoma A noncancerous muscle tumour.
myomectomy Surgical removal of a
myoma. The term is also used to
describe the surgical removal of fibroids
from the uterus.
myopathy A disease of  muscle that is
not caused by disease of the nervous
system. A myopathy may be an inherited
disorder, such as muscular dystrophy; it
may also be caused by chemical poison-
ing, a chronic disorder of the  immune
system, or a metabolic disorder. 
myopia An error of  refraction in which
objects seen in the distance appear
blurred. Commonly called shortsighted-
ness, myopia is caused by the eye being
too long from front to back. As a result,
images of distant objects are focused in
front of the retina.
MYOCARDITIS MYOPIA
M
MYOPIA
Light rays
from distant
object
Lens
Light
rays
focused
on retina
Lens
Light rays
focused in
front of
retina
Cornea
MYOPIA NORMAL
Light rays
from distant
object
Cornea
Retina Retina387
Myopia, which tends to be inherited,
usually appears around puberty and
increases until the early 20s. If it starts
in early childhood it may become very
severe. The condition is detected during
a vision test. Treatment is with concave
glasses (or  contact lenses) or by  photo-
refractive keratectomy.
myosin A major protein component of
muscle fibres. Together with  actin, it
provides the mechanism for muscles to
contract. The myosin molecules slide
along the actin filaments to make the
muscle fibres shorter.
myositis Inflammation of muscle tissue,
causing pain, tenderness, and weak-
ness. Types of myositis include myositis
ossificans (in which damaged muscle is
replaced by bone),  polymyositis, and
dermatomyositis. 
myositis ossificans A  congenital or
acquired condition in which bone is
deposited in muscles. The congenital
form is rare. The first symptoms are
painful swellings in the muscles, which
gradually harden and extend until the
affected child is encased in a rigid sheet.
There is no treatment, and death results.
The acquired form may develop after 
a bony injury, especially around the
elbow; it causes severe pain and a
swelling, which hardens. Treatment with
diathermy, coupled with gentle, active
movements, may be helpful.
myotomy A surgical procedure that in-
volves cutting into a muscle. 
myotonia Inability of a muscle to relax
after the need for contraction has
passed. It is a feature of myotonic dys-
trophy, a form of muscular dystrophy.
myringitis Inflammation of the ear-
drum. Myringitis occurs in otitis media.
myringoplasty Surgical closure of a
perforation (hole) in the eardrum (see
eardrum, perforated) by means of a tis-
sue graft (see grafting). 
myringotomy A surgical opening made
through the eardrum to allow drainage
of the middle-ear cavity. It is usually
performed to treat persistent glue ear in
children. A  grommet may be inserted
into the eardrum at the same time.  
myxoedema A condition in which there
is thickening and coarsening of the skin
and other body tissues (most noticeably
in the face). Myxoedema is usually due
to  hypothyroidism; in such cases, the
condition is commonly accompanied by
weight gain, hair loss, sensitivity to
cold, and mental dullness. The term
※myxoedema§ is sometimes used for
adult hypothyroidism.
myxoma A noncancerous, jelly-like tu-
mour composed of soft mucous material
and loose fibrous strands. Myxomas us-
ually occur singly, and may sometimes
grow very large. They may develop under
the skin, in the abdomen, in the bones,
or, very rarely, inside the cavities of the
heart. In this case, thrombi (blood
clots) may form, and the flow of blood
through the heart may be obstructed.
Myxomas can usually be successfully
removed by surgery.
MYXOMA MYOSIN
M388
nadolol A beta-blocker drug used in the
treatment of  hypertension (high blood
pressure),  angina pectoris (chest pain
due to impaired blood supply to heart
muscle), certain types of  arrhythmia
(irregularity of the heartbeat), and to
control symptoms of  hyperthyroidism
(overactivity of the thyroid gland). Pos-
sible adverse effects are typical of other
beta-blocker drugs.
naevus A type of skin blemish of which
there are 2 main groups: pigmented
naevi are caused by abnormality or
overactivity of melanocytes (skin cells
that produce the pigment melanin); vas-
cular naevi are caused by an abnormal
collection of blood vessels. 
The most common types of pigmented
naevi are  freckles,  lentigos, and  caf谷 au
lait spots: flat brown areas that may occur
where the skin is exposed to the sun.
Another common type is a mole, some-
times called a melanocytic naevus. In
rare cases, moles become cancerous
(see melanoma, malignant). Juvenile mel-
anomas (see  melanoma, juvenile) are
red-brown naevi that occur in childhood.
Blue naevi are common in young girls.
Most black and Asian infants are born
with blue-black spots on their lower
backs (see Mongolian blue spot). 
Port-wine stains and strawberry marks
(see haemangioma and spider naevi) are
examples of vascular naevi.
Most naevi are harmless. However, if a
naevus suddenly appears, grows, bleeds,
or changes colour, medical advice should
be sought immediately to exclude the
possibility of skin cancer.
nail A hard, curved plate on the fingers
and toes composed of keratin (a tough
protein). Nails grow from an area called
the nail bed. At the base of each nail a
half-moon shape, the lunula, is crossed
by a flap of skin called the cuticle. The
surrounding skin is known as the nail
fold. A fingernail takes about 6 months
to grow from base to tip; toenails take
twice as long.
The nails are susceptible to damage
through injury, or by bacterial or fungal
infections, especially  tinea and candidi-
asis. Sometimes they become abnormally
thick and curved: a condition known as
onychogryphosis. Nail abnormalities may
be a sign of skin disease, such as
alopecia areata,  psoriasis, and  lichen
planus, or of more generalized disease,
for example iron-deficiency anaemia. Un-
usual nail colour may indicate disease. 
Treatment of nail disorders can be 
difficult. Creams and lotions seldom
penetrate sufficiently; oral medication
may take months to be effective.
nail-biting A common habit in children
during their early years at school. Most
children grow out of it, although nail-
biting sometimes continues as a nervous
habitin adolescents and adults. 
Various preparations with an unpleas-
ant taste can be painted on the nails as
a preventive measure.
nalidixic acid An antibiotic drug used
to treat and/or to prevent  urinary tract
infection. Possible adverse effects include
nausea, vomiting, increased sensitivity
to sunlight, blurred vision, drowsiness,
and dizziness.
naloxone A drug that blocks the action
of  opioid drugs. Naloxone reverses the
breathing difficulty caused by high doses
of opioid drugs given during surgery.
The drug is also given to newborn babies
who are affected by opioid drugs used to
relieve the mother＊s pain during labour.
NADOLOL NALOXONE
N
NAIL
Nail plate Nail
plate
Nail
matrix
Nail
fold
Nail bed Bone Skin
STRUCTURE OF NAIL
EXTERNAL
APPEARANCE
Lunula
Cuticle
Cuticle
N389
Possible adverse effects include nausea,
vomiting, and tremors.
nandrolone An anabolic steroid (see
steroids, anabolic) used to treat certain
types of anaemia. 
Possible side effects include swollen
ankles and  jaundice. Nandrolone may
cause difficulty in passing urine in men,
and irregular menstruation and abnor-
mal hair growth in women.
nappy rash Common skin inflamma-
tion in babies that is caused by irritant
substances in urine or faeces. Occa-
sionally, the inflammation is severe. 
An ointment containing a mild cortico-
steroid drug may be prescribed to
suppress the inflammation.
naproxen A nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drug (NSAID). Naproxen is used to
relieve joint pain and stiffness in arthri-
tis; it is also prescribed to hasten
recovery following injury to soft tissues,
such as muscles or ligaments.
Possible adverse effects include nausea,
abdominal pain, and peptic ulcer.
narcissism Intense self-love. A narcis-
sistic personality disorder is characterized
by an exaggerated sense of self-impor-
tance, constant need for attention or
praise, inability to cope with criticism
or defeat, and poor relationships with
other people.
narcolepsy A sleep disorder character-
ized by chronic daytime sleepiness with
recurrent episodes of sleep occurring
throughout the day. Attacks may last
from a few seconds to more than an
hour. Cataplexy (sudden loss of muscle
tone without loss of consciousness)
occurs in about 3 quarters of cases. Other
symptoms may include  sleepparalysis
and hallucinations. In narcolepsy, the
REM (rapid eye movement) state of
sleep is entered into abnormally rapidly.
Narcolepsy is often inherited. Treat-
ment usually involves regular naps,
along with  stimulant drugs to control
drowsiness, and antidepressant drugs to
suppress cataplexy.
narcosis A state of stupor, usually
caused by a drug (see  opioiddrugs) or
some other chemical. Narcosis resem-
bles sleep but, unlike someone who is
sleeping, a person in narcosis cannot
be roused completely.
narcotic drugs See  opioidanalgesic
drugs.
nasal congestion Partial blockage of
the nasal passage caused by swelling 
of the mucous membrane that lines the
nose.Nasal congestion is sometimes
accompanied by the accumulation of
thick nasal mucus.
Nasal congestion is a symptom of the
common  cold and of hay fever (see
rhinitis, allergic); it may also be caused
by certain drugs. The swelling may
become persistent in disorders such as
chronic sinusitis or nasal polyps.
Steam inhalation can help to loosen
the mucus. This involves placing the
head over a basin of hot water, possibly
with the addition of aromatic oils such
as menthol or eucalyptus, and inhaling
the steam for several minutes.  Decon-
gestant drugs in the form of drops and
sprays should be used sparingly; tablets
and syrups may be recommended for
long-term use. Persistent nasal conges-
tion should be investigated by a doctor.
nasal discharge The emission of fluid
from the nose. Nasal discharge is com-
monly caused by inflammation of the
mucous membrane lining the nose and
is often accompanied by nasal congestion.
A discharge of mucus may indicate
allergic  rhinitis, a cold, or an infection
that has spread from the sinuses (see
sinusitis). A persistent runny discharge
may be an early indication of a tumour
(see nasopharynx, cancer of).
Bleeding from the nose (see  nose-
bleed) is usually caused by injury or a
foreign body in the nose. A discharge of
cerebrospinal fluid from the nose may
follow a fracture at the base of the skull.
nasal obstruction Blockage of the nasal
passage on 1 or both sides of the nose.
The most common cause of nasal
obstruction is inflammation of the muc-
ous membrane lining the passage (see
nasal congestion). Other causes include
deviation of the nasal septum, nasal pol-
yps, a haematoma (a collection of clotted
blood) usually caused by injury, and,
rarely, a cancerous tumour. In children,
enlargement of the adenoids is the most
common cause of nasal obstruction.
nasal polyp A growth in the lining of the
nose, usually attached by a small stalk.
NASAL POLYP NANDROLONE
Nand, in children, the adenoids, which can
enlarge to block the nasopharynx, forcing
the child to breathe through the mouth.
nasopharynx, cancer of A cancerous
tumour of the nasopharynx that usually
spreads to the nasal cavity, nasal sinus-
es, base of the skull, and lymph nodes
in the neck.
Cancer of the nasopharynx is rare in the
West but common in the Far East. Most
common at age 40每50, it affects twice as
many men as women. One cause is
believed to be the Epstein每Barr virus.
Common first signs are recurrent nose-
bleeds, a runny nose, and voice change.
Loss of sense of smell, double  vision,
deafness, paralysis of one side of the
face, and severe pain may develop.
Diagnosis is through a  biopsy,  MRI
scans, and X-rays. Treatment is usually
with radiotherapy, but surgery may also
be performed. If treated early, the out-
look can be good.
natural childbirth See childbirth, natural.
naturopathy A form of alternativemed-
icine based on the principle that disease
is a result of the accumulation of waste
products and toxins in  the body, and
that symptoms reflect the attempts of
the body to rid itself of these sub-
stances. Practitioners of naturopathy
believe that health is maintained by
avoiding anything artificial or unnatural
in the diet or in the environment.
nausea The sensation of needing to
vomit. Although nausea may occur with-
out vomiting, the causes are the same.
390
Most nasal polyps are noncancerous,
but they may need to be removed if
they cause nasal obstruction.
nasal septum The dividing partition
inside the nose. The nasal septum con-
sists of cartilage at the front and bone
at the rear, both of which are covered by
mucous membrane.
Disorders include a deviated septum
(twisting of the septum to one side),
which may be present from birth or
caused by injury. Surgery may be needed
if breathing is obstructed.
Injury may also cause a haematoma (a
collection of clotted blood) to form bet-
ween the cartilage of the septum and
the wall of one nasal cavity. A haem-
atoma may obstruct breathing and may
become infected, causing an abscess that
could require surgical drainage.
Rarely, a hole may be eroded in the
nasal septum by  tuberculosis,  syphilis,
Wegener＊s granulomatosis, or as a result
of sniffing cocaine.
nasogastric tube A narrow plastic tube
that is passed through the nose, down
the oesophagus, and into the stomach.
Nasogastric tubes are commonly used
to suck or drain digestive juices from
the stomach when the intestine is
blocked (as in pyloric stenosis) or is not
working properly (as may occur after an
abdominal operation). A nasogastric
tube is also used to give liquid nourish-
ment to patients who cannot eat (see
feeding, artificial), to obtain specimens
of stomach secretions for examination,
and to wash out the stomach after a
drug overdose or after swallowing a poi-
son (see lavage, gastric).
nasolacrimal duct A channel that drains
tears into the nose. The nasolacrimal
duct forms part of the lacrimalapparatus.
nasopharynx The passage connecting
the nasal cavity behind the nose to the
top of the throat behind the soft palate.
The nasopharynx is part of the respira-
tory tract and forms the upper section
of the pharynx. During swallowing, the
nasopharynx is sealed off by the soft
palate pressing against the back of the
throat, preventing food from entering. It
contains the lower openings of the
eustachian tubes (passages connecting
the back of the nose to the middle ear)
NASAL SEPTUM NAUSEA
N
NASOPHARYNX
Adenoids
Nasopharynx
Soft palate
Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Larynx
Opening of
eustachian
tube391
navel A popular term for the umbilicus,
the depression in the abdomen that
marks the point at which the umbilical
cord was attached to the fetus. 
nebulizer An aerosol device used to ad-
minister a drug in the form of a fine mist
for inhalation through a face mask or
mouthpiece. Nebulizers are used to ad-
minister bronchodilator drugs, especially
in the emergency treatment of asthma.
neck The part of the body that supports
the head and serves as a passageway bet-
ween the head and brain and the body.
The neck contains many important
structures: the spinal cord (which carries
nerve impulses to and from the brain);
the trachea (windpipe); the larynx (voice
box); the  oesophagus; the  thyroid and
parathyroid glands;  lymphnodes; and
several major blood vessels. The upper 7
vertebrae of the spine are in the neck; a
complex system of muscles is connected
to these vertebrae, the clavicles (collar-
bones), the upper ribs, and lower jaw.
Neck disorders include  torticollis (wry
neck) in which the head is twisted to one
side. Fractures and dislocations of verte-
brae in the neck and whiplash injury can
injure the spinal cord causing paralysis
or even death (see spinal injury).Any con-
dition causing swelling in the neck may
interfere with breathing or swallowing.
Degeneration of the joints between the
neck vertebrae may occur due to cervical
osteoarthritis, causing similar symptoms
to those of disc prolapse. In  ankylosing
spondylitis, fusion of the vertebrae may
result in permanent neck rigidity. Cervi-
calrib is a rare congenital defect in which
there is a small extra rib in the neck.
Neck pain of unknown origin is very
common. As long as neurological symp-
toms (such as loss of sensation or
muscle power) are absent, the condi-
tion is unlikely to be serious and
usually disappears within a few weeks.
neck dissection, radical A surgical
procedure for the removal of cancerous
lymph nodes in the neck. The operation
is commonly part of the treatment of
cancer of the tongue, tonsils, or other
structures in the mouth and throat.
neck rigidity Marked stiffness of the
neck caused by spasm of the muscles in
the neck and spine. Neck rigidity is an
important clinical sign of  meningitis
(inflammation of the membranes cover-
ing the brain and spinal cord). Severe
neck rigidity may cause the head to arch
backwards, especially in babies.
necrolysis, toxic epidermal A severe,
blistering rash in which the surface
layers of the skin peel off, exposing large
areas of red raw skin over the body. The
condition carries a risk of widespread in-
fection and loss of body fluid and salts.
The most common cause of toxic epi-
dermal necrolysis is an adverse reaction
to a  drug, particularly a barbiturate,
sulphonamide, or penicillin. The cond-
ition usually clears up when the drug is
discontinued. Intravenous fluid replace-
ment is sometimes necessary.
necrophilia A rare sexual perversion in
which orgasm is achieved by means of
sexual acts with dead bodies. 
necropsy A little used alternative medi-
cal term for an  autopsy (postmortem
examination of a body).
necrosis The death of tissue cells. Nec-
rosis can occur as a result of  ischaemia
(inadequate blood supply), which may
lead to gangrene; infection, such as  tu-
berculosis; or damage by extreme heat
or cold, noxious chemicals, or excessive
exposure to X-rays or other radiation.
In necrosis due to tuberculosis, the
dead tissue is soft, dry, and cheese-like.
Fatty tissue beneath the skin that has
died as a result of damage or infection
develops into tough scar tissue that
may form a firm nodule.
necrotizing fasciitis A rare, serious
infection of tissues beneath the skin by a
type of streptococcal bacterium. Necro-
tizing fasciitis is most likely to occur as
a complication following surgery. The
initial symptoms are inflammation and
blistering of the skin. The infection
spreads very rapidly, and the bacteria
release enzymes and toxins that can
cause extensive destruction of deeper
tissues and damage internal organs.
Urgent treatment with  antibiotic drugs
andremoval of all infected tissue are ess-
ential. The infection is life-threatening.
needle aspiration See biopsy.
needle exchange A health scheme that
enables intravenous drug abusers to
exchange used hypodermic needles for
NEEDLE EXCHANGE NAVEL
N392
new, sterile ones. The scheme is aimed
at reducing the risks of infections,such
as HIV and hepatitis, transmitted by the
sharing of contaminated needles.
needlestick injury Accidental puncture
of the skin by a contaminated hypoder-
mic needle. Hospital staff are most likely
to be at risk. Needlestick injuries carry
the risk of serious infections, such as
HIV and hepatitis, and need immediate
attention. The wound should be cleaned
thoroughly; blood tests may be needed
to determine whether infection has
been transmitted. 
nefopam An  analgesic drug used to
relieve moderate pain caused, for exam-
ple, by injury, surgery, or cancer. Possible
adverse effects include nausea, nervous-
ness, dry mouth, and difficulty sleeping.
Nelson＊s syndrome A rare disorder of
the  endocrine system that causes
increased skin pigmentation. Nelson＊s
syndrome results from enlargement of
the  pituitary gland, which can follow
removal of the  adrenal glands (a treat-
ment for Cushing＊s syndrome).
Nelson＊s syndrome is treated by
hypophysectomy (removal or destruc-
tion of the pituitary gland).
nematodes The scientific name for a
group of cylindrically shaped worms
(roundworms), some of which can be
parasites of humans.
neologism The act of making up new
words that have a special meaning for
the inventor. The term also refers to the 
invented words themselves. Persistent
neologism can be a feature of speech in
people with schizophrenia.
neomycin An antibiotic drug used in the
treatment of ear, eye, and skin infections,
often in combination with other drugs.
Neomycin is sometimes given to pre-
vent infection of the intestine prior to
surgery. Possible adverse effects include
rash and itching.
neonate A newly born infant, under the
age of 1 month (see newborn).
neonatology The branch of  paediatrics
concerned with the care of  newborn
infants and the treatment of disorders
during the first few weeks of life.
neoplasia A medical term for  tumour
formation. The term neoplasia does not
necessarily imply that the new growth is
cancerous; neoplasia also results in
tumoursthat are noncancerous .
neoplasm A medical term for a  tumour
(any new abnormal growth). Neoplasms
may be cancerous or noncancerous.
neostigmine A drug that is used to treat
myasthenia gravis (a rare autoimmune
disorder that causes muscle weakness).
Neostigmine increases the activity of
acetylcholine, a  neurotransmitter that
stimulates the contraction of muscles.
Possible adverse effects of neostigmine
include nausea and vomiting, increased
salivation, abdominal cramps, diarrhoea,
blurred vision, muscle cramps, sweating,
and twitching.
nephrectomy Surgical removal of 1 or
both of the kidneys.
One of the most common reasons for
nephrectomy is to remove a cancerous
tumour (see kidney cancer). A kidney may
also be removed if it is not functioning
normally due to injury, infection,or the
presence of stones (see calculus, urinary
tract), or if it is causing severe hyperten-
sion (high blood pressure). 
On removal of a single kidney the re-
maining kidney takes over the workload.
If both kidneys are removed, the patient
requires dialysis or a kidneytransplant.
nephritis Inflammation of 1 or both kid-
neys.Nephritis may be caused by an
infection (see pyelonephritis), abnormal
responses of the  immune system (see
glomerulonephritis), or metabolic disor-
ders, such as gout.
nephroblastoma See kidney cancer.
nephrocalcinosis Deposits of calcium
within the tissue of 1 or both  kidneys.
Nephrocalcinosis is not the same as
kidney stones (see calculus, urinary tract),
in which calcium particles develop in-
side the drainage channels of the kidney.
Nephrocalcinosis may occur in any
condition in which the level of calcium
in the blood is raised. It may also occur
as a result of taking excessive amounts
of certain  antacid drugs or  vitamin D.
Treatment is of the underlying cause to
prevent further calcification.
nephrolithotomy The surgical removal
of a calculus (stone) from the kidney.
Nephrolithotomy may be performed
through an abdominal incision, or via 
a puncture incision in the back. Large
NEEDLESTICK INJURY NEPHROLITHOTOMY
Nnephropathy A term for any disease of
or damage to the kidneys.
Obstructive nephropathy refers to kid-
ney damage caused by a urinary tract
calculus (stone), a tumour, scar tissue,
or pressure from an organ that is block-
ing the flow of urine and creating back
pressure within the kidney.
Reflux nephropathy refers to kidney
damage caused by backflow of urine
from the bladder towards the kidney. It
is caused by failure of the valve mecha-
nism at the lower end of the ureter.
Toxic nephropathy refers to damage
caused by various poisons or minerals
(such as carbon tetrachloride or lead).
nephrosclerosis Hardening of the art-
erioles and arteries of the kidney.
nephrosis See nephrotic syndrome.
nephrostomy The introduction of a
small tube into the kidney to drain urine
to the abdominal surface, bypassingthe
ureter and bladder. Nephrostomy is
sometimes performed after an operation
on the ureter or kidney每ureter junction.
nephrotic syndrome A collection of
symptoms and signs resulting from
damage to the glomeruli (filtering units
of the kidney), causing severe proteinuria
(loss of protein from the bloodstream
into the urine). The
syndrome may be
a result of  diabetes
mellitus,  amyloido-
sis (accumulation in
tissues of an abnor-
mal protein called
amyloid), glomeru-
lonephritis, severe
hypertension, reac-
tions to poisons,
and adverse reac-
tions to drugs.
The main symp-
tom is swelling of
thelegs and face
due to oedema. Al-
so, fluid may collect
in the chest cavity,
resulting in pleural
effusion, or in the
abdomen, causing
ascites. Diarrhoea,
lethargy, and  ano-
rexia may occur.
calculi may need to be broken up before
removal. Other methods of removal are
pyelolithotomy and lithotripsy.
nephrology The medical speciality con-
cernedwith the normal functioning of
the  kidneys and with the causes, diag-
nosis, and treatment of kidney disease.
Methods of investigating the kidneys
include kidney  biopsy,  kidney function
tests, and  kidney imaging techniques
such as  ultrasound scanning and  intra-
venous urography. Treatment of kidney
disorders may involve drugs and
surgery and, in advanced cases, dialysis
or a kidney transplant.
nephron The microscopic unit of the
kidney that consists of a glomerulus (a
filtering funnel made up of a cluster of
capillaries) and a tubule. There are
about 1 million nephrons in each kid-
ney. The nephrons filter waste products
from the blood and modify the amount
of salt and water excreted in urine,
according to the body＊s needs. This pro-
cess involves filtration of blood in the
glomerulus followed by further process-
ing as the filtrate flows through the
various parts of the tubule 每 the proxi-
mal convoluted tubule, loop of Henle,
and the distal convoluted tubule.
393
NEPHROTIC SYNDROME NEPHROLOGY
N
NEPHRON
Urine
collecting
duct
Proximal
convoluted
tubule
Distal convoluted
tubule
Artery 
Glomerulus
Loop of Henle
Vein
Capillaries
Glomerular
capsule
Kidney
LOCATION394
Treatment is of the underlying condition.
A low-sodium diet may be recommen-
ded, and diuretic drugs may be given to
reduce oedema. If the concentration of
protein in the blood is very low, protein
may need to be given intravenously.
nerve A bundle of nerve fibres which
travel to a common location. Nerve
fibres, known as axons, are the filamen-
tous projections of many individual
neurons (nerve cells). 
The most obvious nerves in the body
are the peripheral nerves, which extend
from the  central nervous system (con-
sisting of the brain and spinal cord). Of
these, 12 pairs of  cranial nerves link
directly to the brain, and 31 pairs of
spinal nerves join the spinal cord. In the
shoulder and hip regions, the spinal
nerves join to form plexuses, from
which branch the main nerves to the
limbs. Most nerves divide at numerous
points to send branches to all parts of
the body, particularly to the sense
organs, the skin, skeletal muscles, inter-
nal organs, and glands.
Nerve fibres may have a sensory func-
tion, carrying information from a receptor
or sense organ towards the central ner-
vous system (CNS), or they may have a
motor function, carrying instructions
from the CNS to a muscle or a gland.
The messages are carried by electrical
impulses propagated along the fibres.
Some nerves carry only sensory or
motor fibres, but most carry both.
Nerve function is sensitive to cold, pres-
sure,  and injury (see  nerve injury). The
peripheral nerves can be damaged by a
wide variety of disorders, including
infection, inflammation, and metabolic
disorders (see neuropathy).
nerve block The injection of a local
anaesthetic around a nerve to produce
loss of sensation in a part of the body
supplied by that nerve. For example, the
palm of the hand may be anaesthetized
by giving injections at sites up the arm,
blocking the ulnar and median nerves.
A nerve may be blocked as it leaves
the spinal cord. This occurs in epidural
anaesthesia, used mainly in childbirth,
and in  spinal anaesthesia, used mainly
for surgery of the lower abdomen and
limbs. In a caudal block an anaesthetic
is injected around nerves leaving the
lowest part of the spinal cord. It produces
anaesthesia in the buttock and genital
areas, and is occasionally used in child-
birth. A pudendal nerve block involves
the injection of an anaesthetic into
nerves passing under the pelvis into the
floor of the vagina. This type of nerve
block is sometimes used in a  forceps
delivery. (See also anaesthesia, local.)
nerve conduction studies Tests car-
ried out to assess the extent of nerve
damage caused by disorders of the
peripheral nervous system (see  neuro-
pathy).In the test, an electrical stimulus
is applied to a nerve, and the speed at
which the nerve responds to the stimu-
lus and transmits a signal is recorded.
NERVE NERVE CONDUCTION STUDIES
N
NERVE
NERVE CONDUCTION STUDIES
Nerve
fascicle
(bundle
of nerve
fibres)
Blood vessels
Axon (nerve fibre)
Myelin (fatty
insulating sheath)
Nerve
STRUCTURE OF A NERVE
Control panel Monitor displays
speed of nerve
response
Technician
Nerve
stimulator
Recording
electrode395
nerve injury Damage or severance of
conducting fibres within a  nerve as a
result of trauma, causing loss of skin
sensation and muscle power. (See neuro-
pathy for nerve damage from causes
other than injury.)
If a peripheral nerve (a nerve outside
the brain or spinal cord) is only partially
severed, the cut fibres may be able to
regenerate. Provided the severed ends
are still aligned, new fibres can grow
across the cut to rejoin the connection,
restoring function. If a nerve is totally
severed, the individual fibres cannot
regenerate successfully and there is no
recovery of function. Nerve tracts within
the brain and spinal cord are structural-
ly different from the peripheral nerves,
and severed fibres in these tracts do not
regenerate. For example, vision cannot
be restored if the optic nerves are cut.
Microsurgery can sometimes be used
to stitch a severed peripheral nerve into
place, but recovery is rarely complete.
nerve, trapped Compression or stretch-
ing of a nerve, causing numbness,
tingling, weakness, and, sometimes, pain.
Common examples of a trapped nerve
include carpal tunnel syndrome, in which
pressure on the median nerve as it
passes through the wrist causes symp-
toms in the thumb, index, and middle
fingers; a disc prolapse, in which pressure
on the nerve root leading from the spinal
cord produces symptoms in the back
and legs; and  crutch palsy, in which the
radial nerve presses against the humerus
(upper-arm bone), producing symptoms
in the wrist and hand.
A damaged nerve may take some time
to heal. In severe cases, surgical decom-
pression to relieve pressure on the nerve
may be necessary.
nervous breakdown A nontechnical
term used to describe unusual behav-
iour (such as episodes of tearfulness or
shouting and screaming) that may be
part of a crisis of severe anxiety, depres-
sion, or other psychiatric illness. The
condition affects the sufferer＊s ability to
cope with everyday life.
nervous energy A nontechnical term
for the increased drive and activity of
individuals who are always restless,
anxious, and on the go.
nervous habit A nontechnical term for
a minor repetitive movement or activity.
Sometimes a nervous habit consists of
involuntary twitches and facial tics,
such as in  Gilles de la Tourette＊s syn-
drome and some forms of  dyskinesia.
Voluntary nervous habits, such as nail-
biting and  thumb-sucking, are common
in young children. 
All nervous habits increase during
periods of tension or anxiety, and may
be severe in some forms of depression,
anxiety disorder, or drug withdrawal.
nervous system The body system that
gathers and stores information and is in
overall control of the body.
NERVOUS SYSTEM NERVE INJURY
N
Optic nerve
Facial nerve
Cerebellum
Spinal cord
Femoral
nerve
Tibial
nerve
Dorsal
digital
nerves
Medial dorsal
cutaneous
nerve
Superficial
peroneal
nerve
Deep
peroneal
nerve
Common
peroneal
nerve
Sciatic
nerve
Median
nerve
Ulnar
nerve
Radial
nerve
Spinal
nerve
Cerebrum 
of brain
Vagus nerve
Skull
NERVOUS SYSTEM396
The brain and spinal cord form the central
nervous system (CNS), which consists of
billions of interconnected neurons (nerve
cells). Input of information to the CNS
comes from the sense organs. Motor
instructions are sent out to skeletal
muscles, the muscles controlling speech,
internal organs and glands, and the
sweat glands in the skin. This informa-
tion is carried along nerves that fan out
from the CNS to the entire body. Each
nerve is a bundle consisting of the
axons (filamentous projections) of many
individual neurons. 
In addition to the nervous system＊s
anatomical divisions, there are various
functional divisions. Two of the most
important are the  autonomic nervous
system, concerned with the automatic
(unconscious) regulation of internal body
functioning, and the somatic nervous
system, which controls the muscles
responsible for voluntary movement.
The overall function of the nervous
system is to gather and analyse infor-
mation about the external environment
and the body＊s internal state, and to ini-
tiate appropriate responses, such as
avoiding physical danger.
The nervous system functions largely
through automatic responses to stimuli
(see  reflex), although voluntary actions
can also be initiated through the activity
of higher, conscious areas of the brain.
Disorders of the nervous system may
result from damage to or dysfunction of
its component parts (see  brain;  spinal
cord; neuropathy; nerve injury). They may
also be due to impairment of sensory,
analytical, or memory functions (see
vision,  disorders of;  deafness;  numbness;
anosmia; agnosia; amnesia), or of motor
functions (see aphasia; dysarthria; ataxia).
netilmicin An  antibiotic drug usually
prescribed only to treat serious infec-
tion in hospital, when other antibiotic
drugs have proved ineffective. In rare
circumstances, netilmicin can damage
the inner ear or the kidneys.
nettle rash A common name for urticaria.
neuralgia Pain caused by irritation of,
or damage to, a nerve. The pain usually
occurs in brief bouts and may be severe.
Some types of neuralgia are features
of a specific disorder. Migraine sufferers
commonly experience a form of neur-
algia consisting of attacks of intense,
radiating pain around the eye. Postherp-
etic neuralgia is a burning pain that may
recur at the site of an attack of herpes
zoster (shingles) for months or even
years after the illness.
Other types of neuralgia result from
disturbance of a particular nerve. In
glossopharyngeal neuralgia, intense pain
is felt at the back of the tongue and in
the throat and ear, all of which are areas
supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve.
The cause of the pain is generally
unknown. The same is true of trigeminal
neuralgia, a severe paroxysm of pain
affecting one side of the face supplied
by the trigeminal nerve.
Neuralgia is sometimes relieved by
analgesic drugs (painkillers) such as
paracetamol. Glossopharyngeal, trigem-
inal, and postherpetic neuralgia may
respond to treatment with  carbamaz-
epine or other  anticonvulsant drugs, or
to tricyclic antidepressant drugs.
neural tube defect A developmental
failure affecting the spinal cord or brain
of the embryo. The most serious defect
is  anencephaly (total lack of a brain),
which is fatal. More common is  spina
bifida, in which the vertebrae do not
form a complete ring around the spinal
cord. Spina bifida can occur anywhere
on the spine, but it is most common 
in the lower back. 
There are different forms of spina bifida.
In spina bifida occulta, the only defect
is a failure of the fusion of the bony
arches behind the spinal cord, which
may not cause any problems. When the
bone defect is more extensive, there
may be a meningocele, a protrusion of
the meninges, or a myelomeningocele, a
malformation of the spinal cord. Myelo-
meningocele is likely to cause severe
handicap, with paralysis of the legs,
loss of sensation in the lower body,
hydrocephalus, and paralysis of the
anus and bladder, causing incontinence.
Associated problems include  cerebral
palsy, epilepsy, and mental handicap. 
Surgery is usually performed a few days
after birth. In mild cases, the defect can
usually be corrected, but in myelomen-
ingocele, some handicap will remain.
NETILMICIN NEURAL TUBE DEFECT
N397
Genetic factors play a part in neural
tube defects, which show multifactorial
inheritance. Couples who have had an
affected child or who have a family his-
tory of neural tube defects should seek
genetic counselling. The risk of a neural
tube defect occurring can be substant-
ially reduced if the mother takes  folic
acid supplements for a month before
conception and during the early part of
the pregnancy.
Ultrasound scanning and  amniocen-
tesis allow accurate antenatal testing for
neural tube defects.
neurapraxia A type of  nerve injury in
which the outward structure of a nerve
appears intact, but some of the con-
ductingfibres have been damaged or
have degenerated and thus do not
transmit signals normally.
neurasthenia An outdated term that
literally means ※nervous exhaustion§. It
was once used to describe a number of
physical and mental symptoms, includ-
ing loss of energy, insomnia, aches and
pains,  depression, irritability, and re-
duced concentration.
neuritis A term that literally means
inflammation of a nerve. True nerve in-
flammation may be caused by infection
(for example by a virus in herpes zoster
or by a bacterium in Hansen＊sdisease).
The term neuritis is also often applied
to nerve damage or disease from causes
other than inflammation. It has become
virtually synonymous with neuropathy.
neuroblastoma A tumour of the  adre-
nal glands or the sympathetic nervous
system (which is part of the  autonomic
nervous system). Most neuroblastomas
develop in the adrenal glands or in the
sympathetic nerves along the back wall
of the abdomen. Less commonly, tum-
ours develop in the sympathetic nerves
of the chest or neck.
Neuroblastomas are the most com-
mon extracranial (outside the skull),
solid tumour of childhood. Most cases
develop during the first 10 years of life,
especially in the first 5.
Common symptoms include a lump in
the abdomen, tiredness, weight loss,
aches and pains, paleness, and irritabil-
ity. Diarrhoea, high blood pressure, and
flushing of the skin sometimes occur.
The diagnosis of a neuroblastoma is
from MRI and CT scanning, blood tests,
urine tests, and  biopsy of the bone
marrow and any accessible tumours.
Treatment consists of surgical removal
of the tumour, followed by radiotherapy.
Anticancer drugs and a  bone marrow
transplant may also be required. The
outlook varies because neuroblastomas
range from being relatively harmless to
aggressively cancerous.
neurocutaneous disorders A group
of conditions characterized by abnor-
malities of the skin and of the nerves
and/or the central nervous system.
The best known of these neurocut-
aneous disorders is  neurofibromatosis,
in which there are brown patches on the
skin and numerous fibrous nodules on
the skin and nerves. Another example is
tuberoussclerosis, which is character-
ized by small skin-coloured swellings
over the cheeks and nose, mental defic-
iency, and epilepsy.
neurodermatitis An itchy, eczema-like
skin condition caused by repeated
scratching. (See also lichen simplex.)
NEURODERMATITIS
N
NEURAL TUBE DEFECT
Cerebrospinal fluid
Skin
Vertebra
Nerve root
Abnormal
spinal cord
Skin defect
Fluid-filled
sac
Abnormal
vertebra
NORMAL VERTEBRA
MYELOMENINGOCELE
NEURAPRAXIA
Spinal cord neuroendocrinology The study of the
interactions between the nervous system
and the  endocrine system that control
internal body functions and the body＊s
response to the external environment.
neurofibromatosis An uncommon dis-
order that is inherited. Also called von
Recklinghausen＊s disease, neurofibro-
matosis is characterized by numerous
neurofibromas (soft, fibrous swellings,
varying significantly in size), which
grow from nerves, and by  caf谷 au lait
spots (pale, coffee-coloured patches) on
the skin, usually on the trunk and pelvis.
If neurofibromas occur in the central
nervous system, they may cause epilepsy
and other complications. Neurofibro-
matosis can lead to bone deformities.
Rarely, neurofibromas become cancerous.
Surgical removal of neurofibromas is
necessary only if there are complications.
Anyone with this disorder, and parents
of an affected child, should seek genetic
counselling if planning a pregnancy.
neurology The medical discipline con-
cerned with the study of the  nervous
system and its disorders (see also neu-
ropathology; neurosurgery).
neuroma A noncancerous tumour of
nerve tissue. In most cases, the cause is
unknown; rarely, a neuroma develops as
a result of damage to a nerve.
A neuroma may affect any nerve in the
body. Symptoms vary, but there is often
intermittent pain and sometimes weak-
ness and numbness in the areas that
are supplied by the affected nerve.
If symptoms are troublesome, the
tumour may be surgically removed. (See
also acoustic neuroma.)
neuron The term used to describe a
nerve cell. A typical neuron consists of a
cell body, several branching projections
called dendrites, and a filamentous pro-
jection called an axon (also known as a
nerve fibre). An axon branches at its
end to form terminals through which
electrical signals are transmitted to tar-
get cells. Most axons are coated with a
layered insulating myelin sheath, which
speeds the transmission of the signals.
The myelin sheath is punctuated along
its length by gaps called nodes of Ran-
vier, which help this process. Because
the myelin sheath is nonconductive, ion
exchange (depolarization) only occurs
at a node, and signals leap from node
to node along the length of the axon.
The nervous system contains billions
of neurons, of which there are 3 main
types: sensory neurons, which carry sig-
nals from sense receptors into the central
nervous system (CNS); motor neurons,
which carry signals from the CNS to
398
NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY NEURON
N
Myelin sheath
Node of 
Ranvier
Dendrites
Axon 
(nerve fibre) Neuron cell body
Axon branches
NEURON
Nucleus
Synapse
Axon terminalneuropathology The branch of pathol-
ogy that is concerned with the causes
and effects of disorders of the nervous
system. (See also neurology).
neuropathy Disease or inflammation of,
or damage to, the peripheral  nerves,
which connect the central nervous system
(brain and spinal cord), to the muscles,
glands, senseorgans, and internal org-
ans. The term neuritis is now used more
or less interchangeably with neuropathy.
Most nerve cell axons (the conducting
fibres that make up nerves) are insulated
by a sheath of the fatty substance
myelin. Most neuropathies arise from
damage to, or irritation of, either the
axons or their myelin sheaths, which
may cause slowing or a complete block
of the passage of electrical signals.
Polyneuropathy (or polyneuritis) means
damageto several nerves; mononeu-
ropathy (or mononeuritis) indicates
damage to a single nerve; neuralgia
describes pain caused by irritation or
inflammation of a nerve.
Some cases of neuropathy have no
obvious cause. Among specific causes
are  diabetes mellitus, dietary deficien-
cies, excessive alcohol consumption,
and metabolic upsets such as uraemia. 
Nerves may become acutely inflamed
after a viral infection, and neuropathies
may also result from autoimmune disor-
ders, such as  rheumatoid arthritis.
Neuropathies may occur secondarily to
cancerous tumours, or with  lymphomas
and leukaemias. There is also a group of
inherited neuropathies, the most com-
mon being peroneal muscular atrophy.
The symptoms of neuropathy depend
on whether it affects mainly sensory
nerve fibres or mainly motor nerve fibres.
Damage to sensory nerve fibres may
cause numbness, tingling, sensations of
cold, and pain. Damage to motor fibres
may cause muscle weakness and muscle
wasting. Damage to autonomic nerves
may lead to blurred vision, impaired or
absent sweating, faintness, and distur-
bance of gastric, intestinal, bladder, and
sexual functioning.
To determine the extent of the dam-
age, nerve conduction studies are carried
out together with  EMG tests, which
record the electrical activity in muscles.
399
muscles or glands; and interneurons,
which form all the complex electrical
circuitry within the CNS itself.
When a neuron transmits (※fires§) an
electrical impulse, a chemical called a
neurotransmitter is released from the
axon terminals at  synapses (junctions
with other neurons). This neurotrans-
mitter may make a muscle cell contract,
cause an endocrine gland to release a
hormone, or affect an adjacent neuron.
Different stimuli excite different types
of neurons to fire. Sensory neurons, for
example, may be excited by physical
stimuli, such as cold or pressure. The
activity of most neurons is controlled by
the effects of neurotransmitters released
from adjacent neurons. Certain neuro-
transmitters generate a sudden change
in the balance of electrical potential in-
side and outside the cell (an ※action
potential§), which occurs at one point on
the cell＊s membrane and flows at high
speed along it. Others stabilize neuronal
membranes, preventing an action poten-
tial. Thus, the firing pattern of a neuron
depends on the balance of excitatory
and inhibitory influences acting on it.
If the cell body of a neuron is dam-
aged or degenerates, the cell dies and is
never replaced. A baby starts life with
the maximum number of neurons, which
decreases continuously thereafter.
neuropathic joint A joint that has been
damaged by inflammation and a series
of injuries, which pass unnoticed due to
loss of sensation in the joint resulting
from neuropathy (nerve damage caused
by disease). Neuropathic joints develop
in a number of conditions, including
diabetesmellitus and untreated syphilis.
When sensation to pain is lost, abnor-
mal stress and strain on a joint do not
stimulate the protective reflex spasm of
the surrounding muscles; this failure of
the protective reflex allows exaggerated
movement that can damage the joint.
Osteoarthritis, swelling, and deformity
are features of a neuropathic joint.
An orthopaedic brace or  caliper splint
may be necessary to restrict any abnor-
mal movement of the joint. Occasionally,
an  arthrodesis (a surgical operation to
fuse a joint) is performed. The nerve
damage is irreversible.
NEUROPATHY NEUROPATHIC JOINT
Nare released by some types of bacteria
(such as those that cause  tetanus and
diphtheria). Some chemical poisons, such
as arsenic and lead, are also neurotoxic.
neurotransmitter A chemical released
from a nerve ending that transmits
impulses from one  neuron (nerve cell)
to another neuron, or to a muscle cell.
When a nerve impulse reaches a nerve
ending, neurotransmitters are released
from synaptic vesicles and cross a tiny
gap (synapse) to reach the target cell.
Here, they cause channels in the target
cell to open, letting through charged
particles that stimulate an impulse in
the cell. Alternatively, neurotransmitters
may inhibit nerve impulses.
Scores of different chemicals fulfil this
function in different parts of the nervous
system. Many neurotransmitters act as
both neurotransmitters and hormones,
being released into the bloodstream to
act on distant target cells.
One of the most important neuro-
transmitters is  acetylcholine, which
causes skeletal muscles to contract
when it is released by neurons connect-
ed to the muscles.Acetylcholine is also
released by neurons that control the
sweat glands and the heartbeat, and
transmits messages between neurons
in the brain and spinal cord.
Another chemical, noradrenaline (nor-
epinephrine), aids the nervous control of
heartbeat, blood flow, and the body＊s
response to stress. Dopamine plays an
important role in parts of the brain that
control movement.  Serotonin is one of
the main neurotransmitters found in
parts of the brain concerned with con-
scious processes. 
Another group of neurotransmitters is
called the neuropeptides. This group
includes the endorphins, which are used
by the brain to control sensitivity to pain.
neutrophil A type of phagocyte, or white
blood cell. They are an important part of
the  immune system, and their role is to
engulf and destroy invading bacteria.
newborn An infant at birth and during
the 1st few weeks of life (see also pre-
maturity; postmaturity).
NGU An abbreviation for nongonococcal
urethritis.
niacin See vitamin B complex.
Diagnostic tests such as  blood tests, 
MRI scans, and nerve or muscle biopsy
may also be required. When possible,
treatment is aimed at the underlying
cause. If the cell bodies of the damaged
nerve cells have not been destroyed, full
recovery from neuropathy is possible.
neuropsychiatry The branch of medic-
ine dealing with the relationship between
psychiatric symptoms and neurological
disorder. This may include the effects of
head injury and alcohol on the brain, or
disorders such as brain tumours, infec-
tions, inherited illnesses, and disorders
causing brain damage in childhood.
neurosis An old term for a range of psy-
chiatric disorders excluding psychosis.
neurosurgery The specialty concerned
with the surgical treatment of disorders
of the brain, spinal cord, or other parts of
the nervous system.
Conditions treated by neurosurgery
include tumours of the brain, spinal cord,
or meninges (membranes surrounding
the brain and spinal cord); brain abscess;
abnormalitiesof the blood vessels sup-
plying the brain,such as an  aneurysm
(balloon-like swelling at a weak point in
an artery); bleeding inside the skull (see
extradural haemorrhage, intracerebral
haemorrhage,and  subdural haemorrh-
age); some birth defects (such as neural
tube defects and hydrocephalus); certain
types of  epilepsy; and nerve damage
caused by illness or accidents. Neuro-
surgery may also be performed to relieve
pain that is otherwise untreatable.
neurosyphilis Infection of the brain or
spinal cord that occurs in untreated
syphilis many years after initial infection.
Damage to the spinal cord due to
neurosyphilis may cause tabes dorsalis,
characterized by poor coordination of
leg movements, urinary incontinence,
and pains in the abdomen and limbs.
Damage to the brain may cause demen-
tia, muscle weakness, and, in rare cases,
total paralysis of the limbs.
neurotoxin A chemical that damages
nervous tissue. The principal effects of 
neurotoxic nerve damage are numbness,
weakness, or paralysis of the part of the
body supplied by the affected nerve.
Neurotoxins are present in the venom
of certain snakes (see  snake bites), and
400
NEUROPSYCHIATRY NIACIN
N401
nickel A metallic element that is pre-
sent in the body in minute amounts.
Nickel is thought to activate certain
enzymes (substances that promote bio-
chemical reactions), and it may also
play a part in stabilizing chromosomal
material in the nuclei of cells.
Exposure to nickel may cause dermati-
tis (inflammation of the skin).  Lung
cancer has been reported in workers in
nickel refineries.
niclosamide An anthelmintic drug used
to treat  tapeworm infestation. Niclosa-
mide causes the tapeworm to loosen its
grip on the inner wall of the intestine.
The worm is then passed out of the
body in the faeces.
Adverse effects include abdominal
pain, lightheadedness, and itching.
nicorandil A  potassium channel opener
drug used in the prevention and long-
term treatment of  angina. Side effects,
which include flushing, nausea, vomit-
ing, and dizziness, are mainly due to
nicorandil＊s  vasodilation effects and
usually wear off with continued treat-
ment. Rarely, mouth ulcers and muscle
pain can occur.
nicotinamide See vitamin B complex.
nicotine A drug in tobacco which acts
as a stimulant and is responsible for
dependence on tobacco. After inhala-
tion, the nicotine in tobacco smoke
passes rapidly into the bloodstream.
The drug acts on the nervous system
until broken down by the liver and
excreted in the urine.
Nicotine acts primarily on the  auto-
nomic nervous system, which controls
involuntary body activities such as the
heart rate. In habitual smokers, the
drug increases the heart rate and nar-
rows the blood vessels, the combined
effect of which is to raise blood pres-
sure. Nicotine also stimulates the
central nervous system, thereby reduc-
ing fatigue, increasing alertness, and
improving concentration.
Stopping smoking often causes with-
drawal symptoms such as headaches
and difficulty in concentrating. Nicotine
replacement therapy, such as the use of
nicotine skin patches and chewing gum,
can be effective in aiding withdrawal from
nicotine. (See also smoking.)
nicotine replacement therapy  Prep-
arations containing  nicotine that are
used in place of cigarettes as an aid to
stopping smoking. Nicotine products
are available in the form of  sublingual
tablets, chewing gum, skin patches,
nasal spray, or inhaler. Side effects may
include nausea, headache, palpitations,
cold or flu-like symptoms, hiccups, and
vivid dreaming. Nicotine replacement
therapy should be used as part of a
complete package of measures, includ-
ing the determination to succeed.
nicotinic acid A form of niacin (see
vitamin B complex). Apart from its use
as a vitamin supplement, nicotinic acid
is also prescribed as a lipid-loweringdrug
and as a  vasodilator drug. High doses
are used to treat certain types of hyper-
lipidaemia. Nicotinic acid derivatives are
used to improve circulation in disorders
such as peripheral vascular disease.
Adverse effects are more common with
high doses, and include flushing, dizzi-
ness, nausea, palpitations, and itching.
nifedipine A  calcium channel blocker
drug used mainly to prevent and treat
angina pectoris. Nifedipine is also often
used to treat  hypertension (high blood 
pressure) and disorders affecting the
circulation, such as  Raynaud＊s disease.
Possible adverse effects include oedema
(accumulation of fluid in tissues), flush-
ing, headache, and dizziness.
night blindness The inability to see
well in dim light. Many people with
night blindness have no discernible eye
disease. The condition may be an inher-
ited functional defect of the retina, an
early sign of  retinitis pigmentosa, or a
result of vitamin A deficiency.
nightmare An unpleasant, vivid dream,
sometimes accompanied by a sense of
suffocation. Nightmares occur during
REM (rapid eye movement) sleep in the
middle and later parts of the night, and
they are often clearly remembered if the
dreamer awakens completely.
Nightmares are especially common in
children aged between 8 and 10, and
are particularly likely to occur when the
child is unwell or anxious. In adults,
nightmares may be a side effect of cer-
tain drugs, including beta-blocker drugs
and  benzodiazepine drugs. Repeated
NIGHTMARE NICKEL
N402
nightmares may be associated with
traumatic experiences.
Nightmares should not be confused
with hypnagogic  hallucinations, which
occur while falling asleep, nor with
night terror, which occurs in NREM
(nonrapid eye movement) sleep and is
not remembered the next day.
night terror A disorder, occurring mainly
in children, that consists of abrupt arous-
als from sleep in a terrified state. Night
terror (also called sleep terror) usually
starts between the ages of 4 and 7, grad-
ually disappearing in early adolescence.
Episodes occur during NREM (non-
rapid eye movement) sleep, usually half
an hour to 3 and a half hours after fall-
ing asleep. Sufferers wake up screaming
in a semiconscious state and remain
frightened for some minutes. They do
not recognize familiar faces or sur-
roundings, and usually cannot be
comforted. The sufferer gradually falls
back to sleep and has no memory of the
event the following day.
Night terror in children has no serious
significance, but, in adults, is likely to
be associated with an anxiety disorder.
nipple The small prominence at the tip
of each  breast. Women＊s nipples con-
tain tiny openings through which milk
can pass. The nipple and the areola, a
surrounding area of dark skin, both
increase in size during pregnancy. Invol-
untary muscle in the nipple allows it to
become erect.
Structural defects of the nipple are
rare. An inverted nipple is usually a
harmless abnormality of development.
Nipple inversion that develops in older
women is mostly due to ageing, but
mammography may be advisable to rule
out the possibility of cancer.
Cracked nipples, common in the last
months of pregnancy and during breast-
feeding, may lead to infective mastitis.
Washing, drying, and moisturizing the
nipple daily can help to prevent cracking.
Papilloma of the nipple is a noncancer-
ous swelling attached to the skin by a
stalk.  Paget＊s disease of the nipple
appears initially as persistent eczema of
the nipple and is due to a slow-growing
cancer arising in a milk duct. Surgical
treatment is required.
Discharge from the nipple occurs for
various reasons. A clear, straw-coloured
discharge may develop in early preg-
nancy; a milky discharge may occur
after breast-feeding is over.  Galactor-
rhoea  (milk discharge in someone who
is not pregnant or breast-feeding) may
be caused by a hormone imbalance, or,
rarely, a galactocele (a cyst under the
areola). A discharge containing pus
indicates a breast  abscess. A blood-
stained discharge may be due to a
noncancerous breast disorder or cancer.
nitrate drugs A group of  vasodilator
drugs used to treat angina pectoris (chest
pain as a result of impaired blood sup-
ply) and severe  heartfailure (reduced
pumping efficiency of the heart). Two
commonly used nitrate drugs are glyc-
eryl trinitrate and isosorbide.
Possible side effects of nitrate drugs
include headache, flushing, and dizzi-
ness.  Tolerance (the need for greater
amounts of a drug for it to have the
same effect) may develop when the
drug is taken regularly.
nitrazepam A benzodiazepine drug used
in the short-term treatment of insomnia.
Nitrazepam is long-acting and may cause
a hangover, with drowsiness and light-
headedness, the following day. Regular
use can lead to reduced effectiveness.
Nitrazepam can lead to drug depen-
dence and to withdrawal symptoms,
such as nervousness and restlessness.
nitric oxide (NO) A gas that is produced
both outside the body as a pollutant
(for example, in car exhaust fumes), and
inside the body, where it takes the form
of a molecule that acts as a messenger
between cells. Nitric oxide causes blood
vessels to dilate, affecting the flow of
oxygenated blood and regulating blood
pressure. Overproduction of nitric oxide
is associated with various disorders, in-
cluding toxic shock, rheumatoid arthritis,
and  diabetes mellitus; underproduction
may cause  impotence and  angina. The
control of nitric oxide is an important
element of many drug treatments.
nitrites Salts of nitrous acid (a nitro-
gen-containing acid). Sodium nitrite is
used in meat preservation. In large
amounts, nitrites can cause dizziness,
nausea, and vomiting.
NIGHT TERROR NITRITES
N403
nitrofurantoin An antibacterial drug that
is used in the treatment of urinary tract
infection. Nitrofurantoin should be taken
with food to reduce the risk of stomach
irritation, abdominal pain, and nausea.
More rarely, breathing difficulty, numb-
ness, and jaundice occur.
nitrogen A colourless, odourless gas
that makes up 78 per cent of the Earth＊s
atmosphere. Although nitrogen gas
cannot be utilized by the body, com-
pounds of nitrogen, such as  amino
acids, are essential to life.
nitrous oxide (N2O) A colourless gas,
sometimes called laughing gas. Nitrous
oxide is used with oxygen to provide
analgesia (pain relief) and light anaes-
thesia (see anaesthesia, general).
Adverse effects of nitrous oxide and
oxygen may include nausea and vomit-
ing during the recovery period.
nits The eggs of lice. Both head lice and
pubic lice produce eggs, which they stick
to the base of hairs. Nits measure only
about 0.5mm in diameter. They are
light brown when newly laid, and white
when hatched. (See also lice; pubic lice.)
nocardiosis An infection caused by a
fungus-like bacterium present in soil.
The infection, acquired through inhala-
tion, usually starts in the lung and
spreads via the bloodstream to the brain
and tissues under the skin. Nocardiosis
is rare except in people with  immuno-
deficiency disorders or those already
suffering from another serious disease.
The infection causes a pneumonia-like
illness, with fever and cough. It fails to
respond to short-term, antibiotic treat-
ment, and progressive lung damage
occurs. Brain abscesses may follow.
Treatment is with  sulphonamide drugs,
often in conjunction with other antibac-
terial drugs, for example trimethoprim. 
nocturia The disturbance of sleep at
night by the need to pass urine.
A common cause of nocturia in men is
enlargement of the prostate gland (see
prostate,enlarged), which obstructs the
normal outflow of urine and causes
the  bladder to empty incompletely. In
women, a common cause is  cystitis
(inflammation of the bladder), in which
irritation of the bladder wall increases
its sensitivity so that smaller volumes
of urine trigger a desire to urinate. Other
causes of nocturia include diabetes melli-
tus, heart failure (reduced pumping
efficiency), chronic  kidney failure, and
diabetes insipidus.
nocturnal emission Ejaculation that
occurs during sleep, commonly called a
＆wet dream＊. Nocturnal emission is nor-
mal in male adolescents.
node A small, rounded mass of tissue.
The term most commonly refers to a
lymph node, a normal structure in the
lymphatic system. (See also nodule.)
nodule A small lump of tissue. A nodule
may protrude from the skin＊s surface or
form deep under the skin. Nodules may
be either hard or soft.
noise Any sound, particularly one that is
disordered and irregular, that is unwan-
tedor interferes with the ability to hear.
(See also noise-induced hearing loss.)
noise-induced hearing loss  Hearing
loss caused by prolonged exposure to
excessive noise or by brief exposure 
to intensely loud noise.
Exposure to a sudden, very loud noise,
usually above 130 decibels, can cause
immediate and permanent damage to
hearing. Normally, muscles in the middle
ear respond to loud noise by altering
the position of the ossicles (the chain of
bones that pass vibrations to the inner
ear), thus damping down the intensity
of the noise. If these protective reflexes
have no time to respond, the full force
of the vibrations is carried to the inner
ear, severely damaging the delicate hair
cells in the cochlea. Occasionally, loud
noises can rupture the eardrum.
More commonly, noise damage occurs
over a period of time by prolonged expo-
sureto lower levels of noise. Any noise
above 85每90 decibels may cause dam-
age, with gradual destruction of the hair
cells of the cochlea, leading to perma-
nent hearing loss. Prolonged exposure
to loud noise leads initially to a loss of
the ability to hear certain high tones.
Later, deafness extends to all high fre-
quencies, and the perception of speech
is impaired. Eventually, lower tones are
also affected.
Sounds at 85每90 decibels or above may
cause pain and temporary deafness. Pro-
longed  tinnitus (ringing or buzzing in
NOISE-INDUCED HEARING LOSS NITROFURANTOIN
N404
the ears) occurring after a noise has
ceased is an indication that some dam-
age has probably occurred.
noma The death of tissue in the lips and
cheeks due to bacterial infection. Also
called cancrum oris, it is largely confined
to young, severely malnourished children
in developing countries. Noma can also
occur in the last stages of leukaemia.
Without treatment, noma causes severe
ulceration, eventual destruction of the
bones around the mouth, and loss of
teeth. Healing occurs naturally, but
scarring may be severe.
Antibacterial drugs and improved nutri-
tionhalt the progress of the disease.
nonaccidental injury See child abuse.
nongonococcal urethritis Formerly
known as nonspecific urethritis, inflam-
mation of the urethra due to a cause
other than gonorrhoea. Worldwide, non-
gonococcal urethritis is a very common
type of sexually transmitted infection.
Almost 50 per cent of cases are known
to be caused by chlamydia trachomatis
(see  chlamydial infections); others are
caused by the virus that causes herpes
simplex, trichomonas vaginalis infections
(see  trichomoniasis), or other microor-
ganisms. In the remainder of cases, the
cause remains unknown.
In men, the infection usually causes a
clear or a purulent urethral discharge,
often accompanied by pain or discom-
fort on passing urine. The equivalent
condition in women, called nonspecific
genital infection, may not cause symp-
toms unless there are complications.
Treatment may be difficult if the cause
of symptoms cannot be determined.
Antibiotic drugs, such as doxycycline
and erythromycin, are given. Follow-up
visits may be advised after treatment.
In men, epididymitis, prostatitis and ure-
thral stricture (narrowing of the urethra)
can occur as complications of nongono-
coccal urethritis.  Reiter＊s syndrome (in
which there is arthritis and conjunctivi-
tis as well as urethritis) occurs as a
complication in some men who develop
nongonococcal urethritis. 
In women, pelvic inflammatory disease
and cysts of the Bartholin＊s glands may
occur.  Ophthalmia neonatorum, a type
of conjunctivitis, sometimes develops
in babies born to women with chlamy-
dial cervicitis.
noninvasive A term used to describe
any medical procedure that does not
involve penetration of the skin or entry
into the body through any of the natural
openings. Examples include  CT scan-
ning and  echocardiography. The term
noninvasive is sometimes also applied
to noncancerous tumours that do not
spread throughout body tissues.
nonoxinol 9 A spermicide used in con-
traceptive preparations such as gels,
foams, and creams.
nonspecific urethritis See  nongono-
coccal urethritis.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
A group of drugs, also known as NSAIDs
that produce analgesia (pain relief) and
reduce inflammation in joints and soft
tissues such as muscles and ligaments. 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
are widely used to relieve symptoms
caused by types of arthritis, such as
rheumatoid arthritis,  osteoarthritis, and
gout. They do not cure or halt the
progress of disease. NSAIDs are also
used in the treatment of back pain,
NOMA NONSTEROIDAL 
N
NOISE-INDUCED HEARING LOSS
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
RISK OF NOISE-INDUCED HEARING LOSS 
SOUND LEVEL (DECIBELS)
Immediate injury
Risk of
injury
SOURCE OF NOISE
Shotgun blast
at 5m (15ft) 
Jet engine at
30m (100 ft) 
Rock concert
Traffic at
5m (15ft) 
Conversation
Watch ticking405
menstrual pain, headaches, pain after
minor surgery, and soft tissue injuries.
The drugs reduce pain and inflamma-
tion by blocking the production of
prostaglandins (chemicals that cause
inflammation and trigger transmission
of pain signals to the brain).
NSAIDs may cause a wide range of side
effects, the most important of which are
nausea, indigestion, bleeding from the
stomach, and, sometimes, peptic ulcer.
noradrenaline Also known as norepin-
ephrine, a hormone secreted by certain
nerve endings (principally those of the
sympathetic nervous system) and by the
medulla (centre) of the  adrenal glands.
Noradrenaline＊s primary  function  is to
help maintain a constant bloodpressure
by way of stimulating  certain blood
vessels to constrict (narrow) whenthe
blood pressure falls. For this reason,it
may sometimes be injected in the
emergency treatment of shock or severe
bleeding. (See also adrenaline.)
norepinephrine An alternative term
for noradrenaline.
norethisterone A  progestogen drug
used primarily in some  oral contra-
ceptives. Norethisterone is sometimes
prescribed to postpone menstruation. It
is also used to treat premenstrualsyn-
drome, menstrual disorders such as
menorrhagia, endometriosis, and certain
types of breast cancer.It is occasionally
given by injection as a long-acting con-
traceptive. Possible side effects include
swollen ankles, weight gain, depression
and, rarely, jaundice.
nose The uppermost part of the respira-
tory tract, and the organ of  smell. The
nose is an air passage connecting the
nostrils at its front to the nasopharynx
(the upper part of the throat) at its rear.
The nasal septum, which is made of car-
tilage at the front and bone at the rear,
divides the passage into 2 chambers.
The bridge of the nose is formed from 
2small nasal bones and from cartilage.
The roof of  the nasal passage is formed
by bones at the baseof the skull; the
walls by the maxilla (upper  jaw); and
the floor by the hard palate. Three con-
chae (thin, downward-curving  plates of
bone) covered with mucousmembrane
project from each wall.
Air-filled, mucous membrane-lined cav-
ities known as paranasal sinuses open
into the nasal passage. There is an
opening in each wall to the nasolacrimal
duct, which drains away tears. Project-
ing into the roof of the nasal passage
are the hair-like endings of the olfactory
nerves, which are responsible for the
sense of smell.
A main function of the nose is to filter,
warm, and moisten inhaled air before it
passes into the rest of the respiratory
tract. Just inside the nostrils, small hairs
trap large dust particles and foreignbod-
ies. Smaller dust particles are filtered
from the air by the microscopic hairs of
the conchae. The mucus on the conchae
flows inwards, carrying microorganisms
and other foreign bodies back towards
the nasopharynx to be  swallowed and
destroyed in the stomach.
The nose detects smells by means of
the olfactory nerve endings, which, when
stimulated by inhaled vapours, transmit
this information to the olfactory bulb in
the brain.
The nose is susceptible to a wide
range of disorders. Allergies (see  rhini-
tis, allergic), infections such as colds
(see cold, common), and small boils are
common. Backward spread of infection
from the nose occasionally causes a
serious condition called cavernous sinus
thrombosis. The nose is also particularly
prone to injury (see  nosebleed; nose,
broken). Obstruction of the nose may
be caused by a nasal polyp (a projection
of swollen mucous membrane).
Noncancerous tumours of blood 
vessels, known as haemangiomas, com-
monly affect the nasal cavity in babies.
Basalcell carcinoma and  squamous cell
carcinoma may occur around the nos-
tril. The nose may also be invaded by
cancers originating in the sinuses.
nosebleed Loss of blood from the
mucous membrane that lines the nose.
The most common causes of a nose-
bleed are fragile blood vessels, a blow
to the nose, or the dislodging of crusts
that have formed in the mucous mem-
brane as a result of a common cold or
infection. Rarely, recurrent nosebleeds
are a sign of an underlying disorder, such
as  hypertension (high blood pressure), 
NOSEBLEED NORADRENALINE
N406
a bleeding disorder, or a tumour of the
nose or paranasal sinuses.
nose, broken Fracture of the nasal
bones or dislocation of the cartilage
that forms the bridge of the  nose. The
fracture is usually accompanied by
severe swelling of overlying soft tissue.
A fractured nose is painful and remains
tender for about 3 weeks after injury.
Resetting is usually carried out either
before the swelling has started, or when
it has subsided, usually about 10 days
after the injury. Occasionally, a dis-
placed bridge can be manipulated into
position under a local anaesthetic, but,
usually, a general anaesthetic is needed.
A plaster splint is sometimes required
during healing.
nose reshaping See rhinoplasty.
nosocomial A term meaning associated
with hospitals. A nosocomial infection
is one acquired by a patient in hospital.
notifiable diseases Medical conditions
that must be reported to the local
health authorities. Notification of certain
potentially harmful infectious diseases
enables health officers to monitor and
control the spread of infection.
Examples of notifiable infectious dis-
eases are  food poisoning, hepatitis,
measles, malaria, tetanus, tuberculosis,
and pertussis (whooping cough).
Some categories of diseases other
than infections must also be reported.
These include certain  birth defects and
forms of learning difficulties. Cancers are
registered nationally, and cancer data is
now pooled in an international registry. 
Certain types of  occupational disease
are also reportable; examples include
lead poisoning, mercury poisoning, cad-
mium poisoning, and anthrax. (See also
prescribed diseases.) 
NSAID Abbreviation for  nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs.
NSU An abbreviation for nonspecific
urethritis, the former term for nongono-
coccal urethritis.
nuchal thickness scan  Ultrasound
scanning performed in early pregnancy
in order to identify fetuses at high risk
of  chromosomalabnormalities such as
Down＊s syndrome. The scan investigates
the nuchal fold, an area of skin at the
back of the neck. Excessive thickness of
the skin is an indicator of possible chro-
mosomal abnormalities.
nuclear energy The energy released as
a result of changes in the nuclei of
atoms. It is also known as atomic energy
and is principally released in the form
of heat, light, and ionizing  radiation,
such as gamma rays.
Nuclear energy is released in certain
natural processes, including the sponta-
neousdecay of radioactive substances
such as uranium ores, and the nuclear
reactions that power the sun. It is also
what powers nuclear reactors.
nuclear magnetic resonance See MRI.
nuclear medicine Techniques that use
radioactive substances to detect or
treat disease.
Radioactive materials, which may be
injected or swallowed, are taken up by
body tissues or organs in different con-
centrations, and an instrument called a
gamma camera is used to detect and
map the distribution of radiation within
the body (see radionuclide scanning). In
techniques for treatment, diseased tis-
sues are destroyed by exposure to an
external radioactive source or by inser-
tion of a radioactive substance (see
radiotherapy; interstitial radiotherapy;
intracavitary therapy).
nucleic acids Substances found in all
living matter that have a fundamental
role in the propagation of life. Nucleic
acids provide the inherited coded
instructions (or ※blueprint§) for an org-
anism＊s development.
There are 2 types of nucleic acid: deoxy-
ribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic
acid (RNA). In all plant and animal cells,
including human cells, DNA permanently
holds the coded instructions, which are
translated and implemented by RNA.
DNA is the main constituent of chromo-
somes, which are carried in the nucleus
(central unit) of the cell.
DNA and RNA are similar in structure,
both comprising long, chain-like mole-
cules. However, DNA usually consists of
2 intertwined chains, whereas RNA is 
generally single-stranded.
The basic structure of DNA has been
likened to a rope ladder, the chains
forming the 2 sides, with interlinking
structures in between forming the rungs.
NOSE, BROKEN NUCLEIC ACIDS
N407
The ladder is twisted into a spiral shape
called a double helix.
Each DNA chain has a ※backbone§
consisting of a string of sugar and phos-
phate chemical groups. Attached to
each sugar is a chemical called a base,
which can be any of 4 types (adenine,
thymine, guanine, and cytosine) and
forms half a rung of the DNA ladder. The
4 bases can occur in any sequence
along the chain. The sequence, which
may be many millions of individual
bases long, provides the code for the
activities of the cell (see genetic code).
RNA is like a single strand of DNA; the
main difference is that the base thymine
is replaced by another base, uracil.
DNA controls a cell＊s activities by
specifying and regulating the synthesis
of  enzymes and other proteins in the
cell. Different  genes (sections of DNA
that code for information) regulate the
production of different proteins. For a
particular protein to be made, an
appropriate section of  DNA acts as a
template for an RNA chain. This ※mes-
senger§ RNA then passes out of the
nucleus into the cell cytoplasm, where
it is decoded to form proteins (see
genetic code; protein synthesis).
When a cell undergoes mitotic (see
mitosis) division, identical copies of its
DNA must go to each of the 2 daughter
cells. The 2 DNA chains separate, and 2
more chains are formed, side by side
with the original chains. Because only
certain base pairings are possible, the
new double chains are identical to the
original DNA molecule. Each of a per-
son＊s cells carries the same DNA replica
that was present in the fertilized ovum,
so the DNA message passes from one
generation of cells to the next.
nucleus The central core, structure, or
focal point of an object.
The nucleus of a living cell is a roughly
spherical unit at the centre of the cell. It
contains the  chromosomes (composed
mainly of nucleic acid), which are respon-
sible for directing the cell＊s activities, and
is surrounded by a membrane. The mem-
brane has small pores through which
various substances can pass between the
nucleus and the cytoplasm, a thick fluid
that forms the bulk of the cell. Usually,
the nucleus has 1  nucleolus,  a smaller
dense region with no membranethat is
concerned with protein manufacture.
A nerve nucleus is a group of neurons
(nerve cells) within the brain and spinal
cord that work together to perform a
particular function.
The nucleus of an atom, composed 
of protons and neutrons, accounts for
almost the total mass of the atom but
only a tiny proportion of its volume.
Nuclearenergy is produced through
changes in atomic nuclei.
numbness Loss of sensation in part of
the body caused by interference with the
passage of impulses along sensory
nerves. Numbness may be the result of
a disorder of or damage to the nervous
system or its blood supply.
Multiple sclerosis can cause loss of sen-
sation in any part of the body through
damage to nerve pathways in the central
nervous system (CNS). In a neuropathy,
the peripheral nerves (nerves outside
the CNS) are damaged. In a stroke, pres-
sure on, or reduced blood supply to,
nerve pathways in the brain often causes
loss of feeling on one side of the body.
Severe cold causes numbness by
direct action on the nerves. Numbness
may also be a feature of psychological
disorders, such as anxiety, panic attack,
or a hysterical conversion disorder.
Treatment of numbness depends on
the underlying cause.
NUMBNESS NUCLEUS
N
Nucleolus
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Cell membrane Mitochondrion
TYPICAL HUMAN CELL
NUCLEUS408
nutrient An essential dietary factor, in-
cluding carbohydrates, proteins, certain
fats, vitamins, and minerals.
nutrition The scientific study of food
and the processes by which it is diges-
ted and assimilated.
A good diet supplies adequate but not
excessive quantities of  proteins, carbo-
hydrates, fats, vitamins, minerals, dietary
fibre, and water. The daily diet should
include foods from each of the 4 main
food groups: milk and milk products;
vegetables and fruits; breads and cere-
als; meat, eggs, and pulses.
Personal requirements of nutrients
and  energy vary, depending on indi-
vidual body size, age, sex, and lifestyle.
For example, an average woman requires
about 2,000 kcal (8,400 kJ) daily, com-
pared with about 2,750 kcal (11,550 kJ)
for an average man. (See also  energy
requirements.)
nutritional disorders Nutritional dis-
orders may be caused by a deficiency or
excess of one or more  nutrients, or by
the presence of a  toxin (poisonous ele-
ment) in the diet.
A diet deficient in  carbohydrates is
almost inevitably also deficient in pro-
tein, leading to the development of
protein每calorie malnutrition. Such mal-
nutrition is most often seen as a result
of severe poverty and famine (see kwash-
iorkor; marasmus).
Deficiency of specific nutrients is com-
monly associated with a disorder of the
digestive system, such as coeliac disease,
Crohn＊s disease,  or pernicious anaemia
(see anaemia, megaloblastic).
Inadequate intake of protein and cal-
ories may also occur in people who
excessively restrict their diet to lose
weight (see anorexia nervosa), hold mis-
taken beliefs about diet and health (see
foodfad), or suffer from a loss of interest
in food associated with  alcohol depen-
dence or drug dependence.
Obesity results from taking in more
energy from the diet than is used up by
the body. Nutritional disorders may
also result from an excessive intake of
minerals and  vitamins. An excessive
intake of saturated fat is thought to be a
contributory factor in  coronary artery
disease and in some forms of cancer.
Naturally occurring toxins can interfere
with the digestion, absorption, and/or
utilization of nutrients, or can cause
specific disorders due to their toxic
effects: for example, the  ergot fungus
found on rye can cause ergotism.
nymphomania An outdated term for a
condition in which a woman is domi-
nated by an insatiable appetite for
sexual activity with numerous partners.
The equivalent behaviour in men is
called satyriasis or Don Juanism. It was
said to be caused by intense narcissism
and feelings of inferiority.
nystagmus A condition in which there
is involuntary movement of the eyes.
In the most common type, jerky nys-
tagmus, the eyes repeatedly move slowly
in one direction and then rapidly in the
other. Less commonly, nystagmus is
※pendular§, with the eyes moving evenly
from side to side.
Nystagmus may be congenital, in
which case the cause is unknown. It also
occurs in albinism and as a result of any
very severe defect of vision present at
birth, such as congenital cataract.
Persistent nystagmus appearing later
in life usually indicates a nervous sys-
tem disorder (such as multiplesclerosis,
a brain tumour, or an alcohol-relateddis-
order), or a disorder of the balancing
mechanism in the inner ear. Adult-
onset nystagmus is occasionally seen
as an occupational disorder in people
who work in poor light. 
Electronystagmography, a method of
recording eye movements, may be used
to identify the type of nystagmus.
nystatin An  antifungal drug used in 
the treatment of  candidiasis (thrush).
Nystatin may be safely used during
pregnancy. High doses taken by mouth
may cause diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting,
and abdominal pain.
NUTRIENT NYSTATIN
N409
oat cell carcinoma A form of lung can-
cer, also known as small cell carcinoma. 
obesity A condition in which excess fat
has accumulated in the body. A person
20per cent  above the recommended
weight for his or her height (see weight)
is obese rather  than overweight. About
2 in 5 people in the UK are overweight
and a further 1 in 5 obese.
Obesity is usually caused by consuming
more food than is needed for energy.
Energy requirements are determined by
metabolic rate (see metabolism) and level
of physical activity. Family history is
sometimes a factor. Obesity is associated
with some hormonal disorders, but these
are not generally the cause.
Obesity increases the risk of  hyper-
tension, stroke, and diabetes mellitus type
2. Coronaryarterydisease  is more com-
mon,particularly in obese men under
40. Obesity in men is also associated
with increased risk of cancer of the colon,
rectum, and prostate, and, in women, of
the breast, uterus, and cervix. Extra
weight may aggravate osteoarthritis. 
The first line of treatment is a slimming
diet (see weight reduction) plus regular
exercise. Drugs such as appetite sup-
pressants are rarely used due to their
side effects. Wiring of the jaws, stapling
of the stomach, and intestinal bypass
operations are attempted only if obesity
is endangering a person＊s health.
obsessive每compulsive disorder A psy-
chiatric conditionin  which a person is
dogged by persistent ideas (obsessions)
that lead to repetitive, ritualized  acts
(compulsions). Obsessions are com-
monly based on fears about security or
becoming infected. In obsessional rum-
ination, there is constant brooding over
a word, phrase, or unanswerable prob-
lem. Compulsions may occur frequently
enough to disrupt work and social life.
The disorder is often accompanied by
depression and anxiety. If severe, a per-
son may become housebound. 
The disorder usually starts in adoles-
cence. Genetic factors, an obsessive
personality, or a tendency to neurotic
symptoms may contribute. Some types
of brain damage, especially in  enceph-
alitis, can cause obsessional symptoms. 
Many sufferers respond well to  beha-
viour therapy, which may be combined
with  antidepressant drugs, but symp-
toms may recur under stress.
obstetrics The branch of medicine con-
cerned with  pregnancy and  antenatal
care, childbirth, and postnatal care. It is
also the study of the structure and func-
tion of the female  reproductive system.
(See also gynaecology.) 
obstructive airways disease See pul-
monary disease, chronic obstructive.
occiput The lower back part of the head,
where it merges with the neck. 
occlusion Blockage of a passage, canal,
opening, or vessel in the body. This may
be due to disease (for example, a  pul-
monary embolism) or medically induced.
Occlusion also describes eye-patching
for  amblyopia, and the relationship
between the upper and lower teeth when
the jaw is shut. (See also malocclusion.) 
occult Hidden or obscure, such as occult
blood in a sample of faeces.
occult blood, faecal The presence in
the faeces of blood that cannot be seen
by the naked eye, but can be detected
by chemical tests. Such tests are widely
used in screening for cancer of the colon
(see  colon, cancer of). Faecal occult
blood may also be a sign of a gastroin-
testinal disorder such as  oesophagitis,
gastritis, or  stomach cancer; cancer of
the intestine (see  intestine, cancer of);
rectal cancer (see  rectum, cancer of);
diverticular disease; polyps in the colon;
ulcerative colitis; or irritation of the
stomach or intestine by drugs such as
aspirin. (See also rectal bleeding.)
occupational disease and injury Ill-
nesses, disorders, or injuries that result
from exposure to chemicals or dust, or
are due to physical, psychological, or bio-
logical factors in the workplace. 
Pneumoconiosis is  fibrosis of the lung
due to inhalation of industrial dusts,
such as coal.  Asbestosis is associated
OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE AND INJURY OAT CELL CARCINOMA
O
O410
with asbestos in industry. Allergic alve-
olitis  is caused by organic dusts (see
farmer＊s lung).
Industrial chemicals can damage the
lungs if inhaled, or other major organs if
they enter the bloodstream via the lungs
or skin. Examples include fumes of cad-
mium, beryllium, lead, and benzene.
Carbon tetrachloride and vinyl  chloride
are causes of liver disease. Manyof these
compounds can cause kidney damage.
Work-related skin disorders include
contact dermatitis and squamous cell car-
cinoma. Rare infectious diseases that are
more common in  certain jobs include
brucellosis and Q fever (from livestock),
psittacosis (from birds), and leptospirosis
(from sewage). People who work with
blood or blood products are at increased
risk of viral hepatitis (see hepatitis, viral)
and AIDS, as are healthcare profession-
als. The nuclear industry and some
healthcare professions use measures to
reduce the danger from radiation hazards.
Other occupational disorders include
writer＊s cramp, carpal tunnel syndrome,
singer＊s nodes,  Raynaud＊s phenomenon,
deafness, and cataracts.
occupational medicine A branch of
medicine dealing with the effects of var-
ious occupations on health, and with an
individual＊s capacity for particular types
of work. It includes prevention of occu-
pational disease and injury and the 
promotion of health in the working popu-
lation. Epidemiology is used to analyse
patterns of sickness absence, injury, ill-
ness, and death.Clinical techniques are
used to monitor the health of a particular
workforce. Assessment of psychological
stress and hazards of new technology
are part of the remit. Occupational
health risks are reduced by dust control,
appropriate waste disposal, use of safe
work stations and practices, limiting
exposure to harmful substances, and
screening for early evidence of occupa-
tional disorders.
occupational mortality Death due to
work-related disease or injuries. Annual
death rates (deaths per million at risk)
vary widely between occupations, rang-
ing from 5 in UK clothing and footwear
manufacture to about 1,650 in offshore
oil and gas industries. More than 1,000
per year are due to work-related diseases,
mainly pneumoconiosis and cancers.
occupational therapy Treatment com-
prising individually tailored programmes
of activities that help people who have
been disabled by illness or accident to
improve their function and ability to carry
out everyday tasks. Occupational ther-
apy also involves recommending aids
and changes to the home that help to
increase the person＊s independence.
octreotide  A  somatostatin analogue, a
hormone that acts on the  pituitary
gland. Given by injection, octreotide is
used mainly in the treatment of  acro-
megaly and hormone-secreting intestinal
tumours. Octreotide is also used to pre-
vent complications following pancreatic
surgery. Side effects may include vari-
ous gastrointestinal disturbances such
as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain
and bloating, flatulence, and diarrhoea.
ocular Relating to or affecting the  eye
and its structures; also the eyepiece of
an optical device, such as a microscope.
oculogyric crisis A state of gaze in
which the eyes are fixed, usually up-
wards, for minutes or  hours. The crisis
may be associated with muscle spasm
of the tongue, mouth, and neck, and is
often triggered by stress. It may also
occur following encephalitis and in par-
kinsonism, or may be induced by drugs,
such as phenothiazine derivatives. 
oculomotor nerve The 3rd cranial nerve,
controlling most of the muscles that
move the eye. The oculomotor nerve also
supplies the muscle that constricts the
pupil, that which raises the upper eyelid,
and the ciliary muscle, which focuses
the eye. The nerve may be damaged due
to a fracture to the base of the skull or a
tumour. Symptoms include ptosis, squint,
dilation of the pupil, inability to focus
the eye, double vision, and slight protru-
sionof  the eyeball. (See also  trochlear
nerve; abducent nerve.)
oedema Abnormal fluid accumulation
in body tissues that may be localized
(as in swelling from an injury) or gener-
alized (as in heart failure). Symptoms of
generalized oedema, such as swelling
around the base of the spine and in the
ankles, occur when excess body fluid
increases by more than 15 per cent. In
OCCUPATIONAL MEDICINE OEDEMA
Odifficultiesand chest or upper abdomi-
nal pain. The spasm may be caused by
reflux oesophagitis, but often occurs for
no apparent reason. Women are more
commonly affected. A barium swallow
(see  barium X-ray examinations) and
endoscopy may be used to rule out a
more serious condition, such as cancer.
Treatment is of the underlying cause.
oesophageal speech A technique for
producing speech after surgical removal
of the  larynx (see  laryngectomy). Air is
trapped in the oesophagus and is gradu-
ally expelled while the tongue, palate,
and lips form distinguishable sounds.
oesophageal stricture Narrowing of
the  oesophagus that may cause pain,
swallowing difficulties, weight loss, and
regurgitation of food. It may be due to
cancer (see oesophagus, cancer of) or, for
example, persistent reflux  oesophagitis.
Diagnosis may include a barium swallow
(see barium X-ray examinations), endos-
copy, and biopsy. Usually, the narrowed
area is widened by oesophagealdilatation.
oesophageal varices Widened veins in
the walls of the lower oesophagus and,
sometimes, the upper part of the stom-
ach. Varices develop as a consequence of
portal hypertension. Blood in the portal
vein, passing from the intestines to the
liver, meets resistance due to liver 
disease. The increased blood pressure
causes blood to be diverted into small
veins in the walls of the oesophagus and
stomach. These veins may become dis-
tended and rupture, causing vomiting of
blood and black faeces. There are usually
other symptoms of chronic liver disease.
To control acute bleeding, a  balloon
catheter may be passed into the oesoph-
agus to press on the bleeding varices.
The varices may be treated with an intra-
venous injection of vasopressin and/or by
injection, via an  endoscope, of a scle-
rosant that seals off the affected veins.
oesophagitis Inflammation of the  oeso-
phagus. In corrosive oesophagitis, which
is caused by swallowing caustic chemi-
cals such as cleaning fluids, there is
immediate severe pain and swelling in
the throat and mouth. Antidotes are of
limited value, and washing out the
stomach (see  lavage, gastric) increases
thedamage. Treatment consists mainly
411
severe cases, fluid accumulates in large
body cavities, such as the peritoneal
cavity of the abdomen in ascites or the
pleural cavity of the lungs in  pleural
effusion. In  pulmonary oedema, the air
sacs of the lungs become waterlogged.
Causes include heart failure,  kidney
failure, and  nephroticsyndrome. Often,
the underlying cause of oedemacannot
be treated. Treatment is focused on
increasing urine output by restricting
salt intake and using diuretic drugs.
Oedipus complex A psychoanalytic
term that describes the unconscious
sexual attachment of a child for the 
parent of the opposite sex, and the con-
sequent jealousy of, and desire to
eliminate, the parent of the same sex. 
oesophageal atresia A rare  birth
defect in which the oesophagus forms
into 2 separate, blind-ended sections
during development. There is usually an
abnormal channel (tracheoesophageal
fistula) between one of the sections and
the trachea. The condition may be sus-
pected before birth if the mother had
polyhydramnios. The infant cannot swal-
low,and drools and regurgitates milk
continually. If there is an upper tracheo-
esophageal fistula, milk may be sucked
into the lungs, provoking attacks of
coughing and  cyanosis. Immediate
surgery is needed to join the blind ends
of the oesophagus and close the fistula.
If the operation is successful, the baby
should develop normally. Some babies,
however, do not survive.
oesophageal dilatation A procedure to
stretch the oesophagus when it has been
narrowed by disease (see  oesophageal
stricture) and swallowing is difficult.
Endoscopy is used to locate the obstruc-
tion. The narrowed area is then stretched
by passing bougies (cylindrical rods with
olive-shaped tips) down the oesopha-
gus, or by using balloon catheters. 
oesophageal diverticulum A sac-like
protrusion of part of the  oesophagus
wall in which food becomes trapped,
causing irritation, difficulty swallowing,
halitosis, and regurgitation. A diverticu-
lum is usually removed surgically.
oesophageal spasm Uncoordinated
muscle contractions in the oesophagus,
which cause intermittent swallowing
OESOPHAGITIS OEDIPUS COMPLEX
O412
of reducing pain and providing nursing
care until the oesophagus heals.
Reflux oesophagitis is due to poor
function of the muscles in the lower
oesophagus, which permits the stom-
ach＊s acidic contents to rise back into
the oesophagus (see  acid reflux). The
main symptom, heartburn, may be wor-
sened by alcohol, smoking, and obesity.
Poor function of the lower oesophagus
may be linked with a  hiatus hernia.
Treatment focuses on diet and lifestyle
changes. Antacid drugs help to reduce
acidity. Surgical treatment may be nec-
essary for a hiatus hernia. 
Barrett＊s oesophagus, a complication
of reflux oesophagitis, may lead to can-
cer. Severe, chronic oesophagitis can
cause an oesophageal stricture.
oesophagogastroduodenoscopy  An
examination of the upper digestive tract
using an endoscope (see gastroscopy).
oesophagogastroscopy Examination
of the  oesophagus and stomach using
an endoscope (see gastroscopy).
oesophagoscopy Endoscopic examina-
tion of the oesophagus (see gastroscopy).
oesophagus The muscular tube that
carries food to the stomach; a part of
the digestive tract (see digestive system).
The top end has a sphincter muscle that
opens to allow the passage of food; a
similar sphincter operates where the
oesophagus joins the stomach. Peristal-
sis  propels food and liquids down
towards the stomach and intestines for
digestion. (See also swallowing.)
oesophagus, cancer of A malignant
tumour, most common in people over
50, that mainly affects the middle or
lower oesophagus and leads to swallow-
ing difficulties. Smoking and heavy
alcohol intake are risk factors.
Symptoms progressively worsen to a
point where food is immediately regur-
gitated and there is rapid weight loss.
Regurgitated fluid spilling into the  tra-
chea often causes respiratory infections.
Diagnosis is with a barium swallow (see
barium X-ray examinations) and a biopsy
taken during endoscopy. Removal of the
oesophagus may be possible in some
cases.  Radiotherapy may cause regres-
sion of the cancer, relieve symptoms,
and occasionally cure older patients who
might not survive major surgery. Inser-
tion of a rigid tube through the tumour,
or laser treatment to burn through it, can
help to relieve symptoms and improve
nutrition. The overall outlook is poor,
but is improved with early diagnosis.
oesophagus, disorders of Several
disorders, most of which cause swal-
lowing difficulties and/or chest pain.
Infections of the oesophagus are rare
but may occur in immunosuppressed
patients. The most common are herpes
simplex and  candidiasis (thrush).  Oeso-
phagitis  is usually due to reflux of
stomach contents, causing heartburn.
Corrosive oesophagitis can occur as a
result of swallowing caustic chemicals.
Both may cause an oesophageal stricture.
Congenital defects include  oesophag-
eal atresia, which requires surgery soon
after birth. Tumours of the oesophagus
are quite common; about 90 per cent are
cancerous  (see  oesophagus, cancer of).
Injury to the oesophagus is most com-
monly caused by a tear or rupture due
to severe vomiting and retching. (See
also swallowing difficulty.)
oestradiol See estradiol.
oestriol See estriol.
oestrogen drugs A group of synthetic-
ally produced drugs that are used in oral
contraceptives and to supplement or re-
place the body＊s own oestrogen hormones.
OESOPHAGOGASTRODUODENOSCOPYOESTROGEN DRUGS
O
Mouth
Oesophagus
Stomach
Tongue
Epiglottis
Pharynx
OESOPHAGUSolecranon In the arm, the bony projec-
tion at the upper end of the  ulna that
forms the point of the elbow. 
olfactory nerve The first cranial nerve,
which conveys sensations of smell as
nerve impulses from the nose to the
brain. Each of the 2 olfactory nerves has
receptors in the mucous membrane lin-
ing the nasal cavity. These receptors
detect smells and send signals along
nerve fibres, which pass through tiny
holes in the roof of the nasal cavity and
combine to form the olfactory bulbs.
From here, nerve fibres come together
to form the olfactory nerve, leading to
the olfactory centre in the brain. Sense
of smell may be lost or impaired due to
damage to the olfactory nerves, usually
as a result of head injury.
oligo- A prefix meaning few, scanty or
little, as in oligospermia (too few sperm
in the semen). 
oligodendroglioma A rare and slow-
growing type of primary  brain tumour
mainly affecting young or middle-aged
adults. Surgical removal of the tumour
can, in some cases, lead to a total cure. 
oligohydramnios A rare condition in
pregnancy in which there is insufficient
amniotic fluid  surrounding the fetus in
the uterus.  
oligospermia A temporary or perma-
nent deficiency in the number of sperm
in the  semen. Oligospermia is a major
413
Oestrogen drugs are often used together
with progestogen drugs.
Oestrogens suppress the production
of  gonadotrophin hormones, which
stimulate cell activity in the  ovaries.
High doses are used in  postcoital con-
traception to prevent conception(see
contraception, emergency).They are also
used to treat, or sometimes prevent,
menopausal symptoms and disorders.
Oestrogens may be used to treat certain
forms of infertility, female hypogonadism,
abnormal menstrual bleeding, prostatic
cancer (see prostate, cancer of), and cer-
tain types of breast cancer.
Oestrogens may cause breast tender-
ness and enlargement, bloating, weight
gain, nausea, reduced sex drive, depres-
sion, migraine, and bleeding between
periods. Side effects often subside after
2 or 3 months. The drugs can increase
the risk of abnormal blood clotting and
susceptibility to high blood pressure (see
hypertension). Oestrogen drugs should
not be taken in pregnancy as they may
adversely affect the fetus.
oestrogen hormones A group of hor-
mones that are essential for normal
female sexual development and healthy
functioning of the reproductive system.
In women, they are produced mainly in
the  ovaries and also in the  placenta in
pregnancy. Small amounts are pro-
duced in the  adrenal glands in both
men and women, but oestrogens have
no known specific function in men. When
levels are low, oestrogen hormones can
be replaced with oestrogen drugs.
oestrone See estrone.
ofloxacin A quinolone antibiotic used to
treat skin, soft tissue, and lower respira-
tory tract and urinary tract infections. It is
usually taken in tablet form to treat infec-
tions  that have not responded to other
drugs but is also given by intravenous
infusion for severe  systemic infections.
Side effects may include nausea, vomit-
ing, diarrhoea, and abdominal pain.
oils See fats and oils.
ointment A greasy preparation used as
a vehicle to apply drugs in dry skin con-
ditions such as eczema or to protect or
lubricate the skin.
olanzapine An  antipsychotic drug used
for the treatment of schizophrenia.
OLIGOSPERMIA OESTROGEN HORMONES
O
Nasal
cavity
Olfactory nerve Brain Olfactory 
bulb 
Nerve
fibres of
olfactory
receptors
OLFACTORY NERVE414
cause of infertility, especially when other
disorders of the sperm are also present.
Normally, there are more than 20 mil-
lion sperm per millilitre of semen. A low
sperm count can be due to various dis-
orders, including orchitis, undescended
testis (see  testis, undescended), and,
infrequently, a varicocele (varicose vein
of the testis). Smoking, alcohol abuse,
stress, and some drugs may cause tem-
porary oligospermia. Treatment is for
the underlying cause. If the cause is
unknown, gonadotrophin hormones may
be prescribed. (See also azoospermia.)
oliguria The production of low quanti-
ties of urine in proportion to the volume
of fluid taken in. The condition may be
caused by excessive sweating; in some
cases, it is a sign of kidney failure.
olive oil An oil, obtained from the fruit
of the olive tree  OLEA EUROPAEA, that
may be used to soften earwax or to treat
cradle cap in babies.
-oma A suffix denoting a tumour, which
may be cancerous or noncancerous, as
in lipoma and carcinoma.
omentum A double fold of fatty mem-
brane hanging in front of the intestines.
omeprazole A drug that is used to treat
peptic ulcer, reflux  oesophagitis, and
Zollinger每Ellison syndrome. Adverse ef-
fects include rashes, headache, nausea,
diarrhoea, and constipation.
omphalocele An alternative name for
exomphalos.
onchocerciasis A tropical disease, also
called river blindness, caused by the
worm  ONCHOCERCA VOLVULUS. The dis-
easeis a type of filariasis transmitted by
simulium flies. The worms＊ dead larvae
can lead to blindness if they cause an
allergic reaction in or near the eyes.
Treatment is with anthelmintic drugs.
oncogenes Genes found in every cell that
control growth, repair, and replacement.
Abnormalities of oncogenes are known
to be a factor in the development of can-
cerous cells. Mutations in oncogenes,
resulting from damage by  carcinogens,
can  cause a cell to grow unrestrainedly
andinfiltrate and destroy normal tissues
(see  cancer). Factors  known to cause
cancer include ultraviolet light, radioac-
tivity,  tobacco, alcohol, asbestos, some
chemicals, and certain viruses. 
oncology The study of the causes, devel-
opment, characteristics, and treatment
of tumours, particularly cancers.
ondansetron A serotonin antagonist drug
usedto  control nausea and vomiting
following an operation or induced by
radiotherapy  or  anticancer drugs. It is
taken as tablets or suppositories, or given
by injection. Side effects may include
constipation, headache, and hiccups. 
onychogryphosis  Abnormal thicken-
ing, hardening, and curving of the nails
that occurs mainly in elderly people.
Onychogryphosis may be associated
with fungal infection or poor circulation.
onycholysis Separation of the nail from
its bed: a feature of many skin condi-
tions, including psoriasis and dermatitis.
oophorectomy Removal of the ovaries,
usually to treat  ovarian cysts or cancer
(see ovary, cancer of). A partial oophor-
ectomy may be performed to preserve
ovarian function in women under 40. In
a  hysterectomy, both ovaries may be
removed if disease has spread from the
uterus, or to prevent ovarian cancer from
developing in the future. The ovaries
may be removed as part of the treat-
ment for breast cancer if growth of the
tumour depends on hormones produced
by the ovary. If both ovaries are removed
before the menopause, hormone replace-
ment therapy (HRS) may be needed.
-opathy A suffix that denotes a disease
or disorder, as in  neuropathy (a disor-
der of the peripheral nerves).
open heart surgery Any operation on
the  heart in which it is stopped tem-
porarily and its function taken over by a
mechanical pump. The main forms of
open heart surgery are correction of con-
genital heart defects (see heart disease,
congenital), surgery for narrowed or leaky
heart valves (see  heart-valve surgery),
and coronary artery bypass surgery. Once
the pump is connected, the heart is
opened, and the defects repaired. Surgi-
cal hypothermia is used to keep the
heart cool and help prevent damage to
the heart muscle from lack of oxygen
(see hypothermia, surgical). 
operable A term applied to a condition
that is suitable for surgical treatment,
such as an accessible noncancerous
tumour. (See also inoperable.)
OLIGURIA OPERABLE
O415
operating theatre A specialized hos-
pital room in which surgical procedures
are performed. The risk of infection of
open wounds during surgery is reduced
by a ventilation system that continually
provides clean, filtered air, and walls
and floors that are easily washable. Sur-
geons, assistants, and nurses use sterile
brushes and bactericidal soaps to scrub
their hands and forearms before putting
on sterile gowns, masks, and gloves.
The theatre is equipped with shadowless
operating lights; lightboxes for viewing
X-ray images; anaesthetic machines (see
anaesthesia, general); and a  diathermy
machine, which controls bleeding. A
heart每lung machine may also be used.
operation A surgical procedure, usually
carried out with instruments but some-
times using only the hands (as in the
manipulation of a simple fracture).
ophthalmia An old term for ophthalmitis.
ophthalmia neonatorum A type of
eye inflammation and discharge (oph-
thalmitis) that occurs in newborn infants,
usually as a result of infection with
gonorrhoea  or  chlamydia  at birth. The
infection is treated with antibiotic drugs.
ophthalmitis A term that describes any
inflammatory  eye disorder. Types of
ophthalmitis include ophthalmia neona-
torum and sympathetic ophthalmitis: a
rare condition in which a penetrating
injury to one eye is followed by severe
uveitis  that can cause blindness in the
other eye. Sympathetic ophthalmitis can
be treated with corticosteroid drugs, but
removal of the injured eye is sometimes
necessary to save the sight of the other. 
ophthalmology The study of the eye and
the diagnosis and treatment of the disor-
ders that affect it. Ophthalmology covers
assessment of vision, prescription of
glasses or contact lenses, and surgery for
eye disorders, such as cataracts and glau-
coma. (See also  eye, examination of;
optician; optometry; orthoptics.)
ophthalmoplegia Partial or total para-
lysis of the muscles that move the eyes.
Ophthalmoplegia may be caused by dis-
easeof the muscles themselves, such as
Graves＊ disease, or by a condition that
OPHTHALMOPLEGIA OPERATING THEATRE
O
Operating
lamp
Chief
surgeon
Piped gases
and suction
OPERATING THEATRE
Intravenous
drip
Monitor
Anaesthetist
Operating table Instrument table
Water bowl
Scrub nurse
Theatre
nurse
Viewing
screen
Power
supply
ClocksAssistant
surgeon416
affects the brain or the nerves supplying
the eye muscles, such as stroke, a brain
tumour, encephalitis, or multiple sclerosis.
ophthalmoscope An instrument used
to examine the inside of the eye.
ophthalmoscopy A noninvasive proce-
dure in which an ophthalmologist (a
doctor specializing in eye disorders)
uses an ophthalmoscope to examine the
inside of the eye. The ophthalmoscope
is used first to direct a beam of light
into the eye and then to examine the
light-sensitive  retina; the retinal blood
vessels; the head of the optic nerve; and
the jelly-like vitreous humour.
opiate Any drug derived from, or chemi-
cally similar to, opium.
opioid A type of  analgesic drug (pain-
killer) used to treat moderate to severe
pain. Opioids, also knows as narcotic
drugs, may be abused for their euphoric
effects; abuse may cause  tolerance (the
need for greater amounts of a drug to
get the same effect), and physical and
psychological  drug dependence. Com-
monly used opioids include  codeine,
diamorphine, morphine, and pethidine.
opium A substance obtained from the
unripe seed pods of the poppy plant
PAPAVERSOMNIFERUM. Opium has an 
analgesic effect and may also cause
sleepiness and euphoria. Opium and its
derivatives, such as codeine and diamor-
phine,are known as opioid.
opportunistic infection Infection by
organisms that rarely have serious or
widespread effects in people of normal
health, but which can cause serious ill-
ness or widespread infection in a person
whose  immune system is impaired.In
most patients with AIDS, death is due
to opportunistic infections, especially
pneumocystis pneumonia. Many fungal
infections, such as candidiasis,and some
viral infections, such as herpes simplex,
are opportunistic infections. Treatment
is with appropriate antimicrobial drugs.
oppositional defiant disorder A type
of behavioural disorder that usually
appears in childhood or early adoles-
cence. Typically, a child shows hostile,
argumentative behaviour that includes
loss of temper, defiance of rules, and
swearing. To some extent such behaviour
is common in adolescence, but when
law-breaking or violence occur the con-
dition is deemed to be pathological.
optic atrophy A shrinkage or wasting
of the optic nerve  fibres due to disease
or injury to the optic nerve, resulting in
partial or complete loss of vision. Optic
atrophy may occur without prior signs
of nerve disease, such as inflammation.
optic disc The area on the retina where
nerve fibres from the eyeball join the
optic nerve. The optic disc is also known
as the blind spot due to its lack of light-
sensitive cells.
optician A person who fits and sells
glasses or contact lenses. An ophthalmic
optician, or optometrist, also examines
the eyes to test for myopia, presbyopia,
hypermetropia,or  astigmatism. People
with suspected eye disorders are referred
to a specialist called an ophthalmologist.
(See also ophthalmology; optometry.) 
optic nerve The 2nd  cranial nerve; the
nerve of vision. The 2 optic nerves each
consist of about 1 million nerve fibres
that transmit impulses from the  retina
to the  brain. The optic nerves converge
behind the eyes, where fibres from the
inner halves of the retina cross over.
Nerve fibres from the right halves of
both retinas go to right side of the
occipital lobes in the brain; those from
the left halves go to the left side. 
Disorders of the optic nerve include
optic neuritis and papilloedema. The latter
is caused by pressure on the nerve from
disease in the orbit or a brain tumour.
optic neuritis Inflammation of the optic
nerve, often causing sudden loss of part
of the visual field. Attacks are sometimes
OPHTHALMOSCOPE OPTIC NEURITIS
O
Ophthalmoscope Ophthalmologist
OPHTHALMOSCOPY417
accompanied by pain on moving the
eyes. Vision usually improves within 6
weeks, but some optic nerve fibres will
be damaged. Recurrent attacks usually
lead to permanent loss of visual acuity.
Most cases are thought to be due to
demyelination of the optic nerve fibres in
multiple sclerosis. The condition may also
result from inflammation or infection of
tissues around the optic nerve. Cortico-
steroiddrugs may help to restore vision,
but seem to have little effect on long-
term outcome. (See also optic atrophy.)
optometry The practice of assessing
vision to establish whether glasses or
contact lenses are needed to correct a
visual defect, as carried out by an
optometrist. Disorders of the eye may
require treatment by an ophthalmolo-
gist. (See also ophthalmology; optician.)
oral Concerning the mouth.
oral contraceptives A group of oral
drug preparations containing one or
more synthetic female  sex hormones,
taken by women in a monthly cycle to
prevent pregnancy. ※The pill§ commonly
refers to the combined or the phased pill,
which both contain an  oestrogen drug
and a progestogen drug, and the mini-
pill, which contains only a progestogen.
Oestrogen pills include  ethinylestradiol;
progestogens include levonorgestrel and
norethisterone. When used correctly, the
number of pregnancies among women
using oral contraceptives for one year is
less than 1 per cent. Actual failure rates
may be 4 times higher, particularly for
the minipill, which has to be taken at
precisely the same time each day.
Combined and phased pills increase
oestrogen and progesterone levels. This
interferes with the production of two
hormones,  luteinizing hormone (LH)
and  follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH),
which in turn prevents ovulation. The
minipill works mainly by making the
mucus lining of the  cervix too thick to
be penetrated by sperm.
Oestrogen-containing pills offer protec-
tion against uterine and ovarian cancer,
ovarian cysts,  endometriosis, and  iron-
deficiency anaemia. They also tend to
make menstrual periods regular, lighter,
and relatively pain-free. Possible side
effects include nausea, weight gain,
depression, swollen breasts, reduced sex
drive, increased appetite, leg and abdom-
inal cramps, headaches, and dizziness.
More seriously, there is a risk of throm-
bosis causing a  stroke or a  pulmonary
embolism. These pills may also aggravate
heart disease or cause  hypertension,
gallstones, jaundice, and, very rarely, liver
cancer. All oral contraceptives can cause
bleeding between periods, especially
the minipill. Other possible adverse
effects of the minipill include irregular
periods, ectopic pregnancy, and ovarian
cysts. There may be a slightly increased
long-term risk of breast cancer for
women taking the combined pill.
Oestrogen-based pills should generally
be avoided in women with hypertension,
hyperlipidaemia,  liver disease, migraine,
otosclerosis, or who are at increased risk
of a thrombosis. They are not usually pre-
scribed to a woman with a personal or
family history of heart or circulatory dis-
orders, or who suffers from unexplained
vaginal bleeding. The minipill or a low-
oestrogen pill may be used by women
who should avoid oestrogens. Combined
or phased pills may interfere with milk
production and should not be taken
during breast-feeding. Certain drugs
may impair the effectiveness of oral
contraceptives. (See also contraception.)
oral hygiene Measures to keep the
mouth and teeth clean and reduce the
risk of tooth decay (see  caries, dental),
gingivitis and other gum disorders, and
halitosis. Oral hygiene includes regular,
thorough toothbrushing and flossing (see
floss, dental) to remove plaque. Disclosing
agents help to reveal build-up of plaque.
Dentures are brushed on all surfaces and
soaked in cleansing solution.
Professional treatment to remove cal-
culus and stubborn plaque by scaling
and polishing is usually carried out by a
dentist or dental hygienist during a rou-
tine check-up. In  periodontal disease,
treatment may be needed more often.
oral rehydration therapy See  rehy-
dration therapy.
oral surgery The branch of surgery
that treats deformity, injury, or disease
of the teeth, jaws, and other parts of the
mouth. Procedures include the extrac-
tion of impacted wisdom teeth (see
ORAL SURGERY OPTOMETRY
O418
impaction, dental) and  alveolectomy.
More complicated oral  surgery includes
orthognathicsurgery to correct deformi-
ties of the jaw; repair of a broken jaw;
plastic surgery to correct  cleftlipand
palate; and the removal of some non-
cancerous tumours from the mouth.
oral syringe A device used to administer
liquid medicines by mouth, especially to
young children. Small, accurately mea-
sured doses of the drug are drawn into
the syringe via a plunger and squirted
on to the inside of the cheek.
orbit The socket in the  skull containing
the eyeball, protective fat, blood ves-
sels, muscles, and nerves. The  optic
nerve passes into the brain through an
opening in the back of the orbit. 
A severe blow to the face may fracture
the orbit, but the eyeball is often
undamaged as it can move back into the
socket. Fractures often heal without
treatment, but some cause deformity
and require corrective surgery.Rarely,
bacterial infection spreads from a  sinus
or the face to cause orbital cellulitis.
orbital cellulitis Bacterial infection of
the tissues within the eye socket, or
orbit. Infection is potentially serious as
it may spread to the brain. Treatment is
with high doses of antibiotic drugs.
orchidectomy The surgical removal of
one or both of the testes. Orchidectomy
may be performed for testicular cancer
(see testis, cancer of) or gangrene due to
torsion (see  testis, torsion of), or to
reduce production of testosterone in the
treatment of cancer of the prostate
gland (see prostate, cancer of). Removal
of one testis does not affect sex drive,
potency, or the ability to have children.
orchidopexy An operation to bring
down an undescended testis (see testis,
undescended) into the scrotum.Orchi-
dopexy is usually performed at age 2每5
to reduce the risk of later  infertility or
testicular cancer (see testis, cancer of).
orchitis Inflammation of a testis. Orchitis
may be caused by the mumps virus, par-
ticularlyif infection occurs after puberty.
Swelling and severe pain in the affected
testis are accompanied by high fever. In
epididymo-orchitis, the tube that carries
sperm from the testis is also inflamed.
Treatment is with analgesicdrugs and
ice-packs to reduce swelling;  antibiotic
drugs may be given, but not for mumps
orchitis. The condition usually begins
to subside within 7 days but is occasion-
ally followed by shrinking of the testis.
orf A skin infection occasionally transmit-
ted to humans from sheep. Caused by a
pox virus, orf usually produces a single
persistent, fluid-filled blister on the arm
or hand. The antiviral drug idoxuridine
may hasten recovery. Large  lesions may
be removed surgically.
organ A collection of various  tissues
integrated into a distinct structural unit
to perform specific functions. For exam-
ple, the brain consists of nerve tissue
and support tissue organized to receive,
process, and send out information.
organ donation The agreement of a
person (or his or her family) to surgical
removal of one or more organs for use in
transplant surgery. Most organs for trans-
plantation, such as the heart, lungs, liver,
and kidneys, are  removed  immediately
after death, often in intensive care units
where heart and lung function is some-
times maintained by machine after brain
death been certified. Compatible living
donors may also be able to give a kidney
(see  tissue-typing). People can facilitate
use of their organs after death by inform-
ing relatives and carrying a donor card.
(See also cornealgraft; heart每lungtrans-
plant; heart transplant; heart-valve surgery;
kidney transplant; liver transplant.)
ORAL SYRINGE ORGAN DONATION
O
Syringe angled
so that tip is
towards cheek
ORAL SYRINGE
USING AN ORAL SYRINGEduring which there is no physical re-
sponse to further sexual stimulation.
Both men and women may experience
problems with orgasm (see  ejaculation,
disorders of; orgasm, lack of).
orgasm, lack of Inability to achieve
orgasm during sexual activity. It may be
due to inhibited sexual desire (see sexual
desire, inhibited) or inability to become
aroused or maintain arousal (see frigid-
ity; impotence). In men, there may be a
problem achieving orgasm despite nor-
mal arousal (see ejaculation, disorders of).
The problem is common in women; some
may achieve orgasm through masturba-
tion but not during sexual intercourse.
Sometimes it is due to pain during
intercourse (see intercourse, painful).
For both sexes, contributory factors
include problems with technique or in
the relationship, unfamiliarity with sex-
ual responses, psychological problems
(such as anxiety, early sexual trauma, or
inhibitions), and fear of pregnancy. Sex
therapy,  relationship counselling, and
psychotherapy are sometimes helpful.
orlistat An anti-obesity drug used with a
slimming diet to treat severe obesity.
Unlike appetite suppressants, orlistat acts
on the gastrointestinal tract, preventing
the digestion of fats by lipases(pancreat-
ic enzymes). Instead of being absorbed,
the fats pass out of the body in faeces.
Side effects are gastrointestinal and
can be minimized by reducing fat in-
take. Flatulence and faecal urgency are
common. Deficiencies of fat-soluble vit-
amins may develop with prolonged use.
ornithosis A disease of birds, caused by
the microorganism  CHLAMYDIAPSITTACI,
that can cause psittacosis in humans.
orphan drugs Drugs that have been
developed to treat rare conditions but
are not manufactured generally. 
orphenadrine A  muscle-relaxant drug
used to treat painful muscle spasm due
to soft-tissue injury and Parkinson＊s dis-
ease. Side effects include a dry mouth
and blurred vision.
ORT An abbreviation for oral rehydration
therapy. (See also rehydration therapy.)
ortho-A prefix meaning normal, correct,
or straight, as in orthopaedics, a branch
of surgery concerned with correcting dis-
orders of the bones and joints.
419
organelle One of various specialized
structures contained within a body cell.
organic Related to a body  organ; hav-
ing organs or an organized structure; or
related to  organisms or to substances
from them. In chemistry, ※organic§ refers
to certain compounds that contain car-
bon. In medicine, the term indicates the
presence of disease. (See also inorganic.)
organic brain syndrome See  brain
syndrome, organic. 
organism A general term for an individ-
ual animal or plant. Bacteria and viruses
are disease-causing microorganisms. 
organophosphates  Highly poisonous
agricultural insecticides that are harm-
ful when absorbed through the skin, by
inhalation, or by swallowing. Among the
many possible symptoms are nausea,
vomiting, abdominal cramps, diarrhoea,
blurred vision, excessive sweating, head-
ache, confusion, and twitching. Severe
poisoning may cause breathing difficulty,
palpitations, seizures, and unconscious-
ness. If left untreated, death may result.
Treatment may include washing out the
stomach (see lavage, gastric) or removing
soiled clothing and washing  contami-
nated skin. Injections of atropine may be
given, and oxygen therapy and/or artifi-
cial  ventilation may be needed. With
rapid treatment, people may survive
doses that would otherwise have been
fatal. Long term effects of organophos-
phates in sheep dips are thought to be
responsible for debilitating illness with
neural, muscular, and mental symptoms.
orgasm Intense sensations produced
by a series of muscular contractions at
the peak of sexual excitement. Orgasm
usually lasts for about 3每10 seconds but
can last up to a minute in women. 
In men, contractions of the muscles of
the inner pelvis massage seminal fluid
from the prostate gland into the urethra,
from which it is forcefully propelled via
the urethral orifice (see  ejaculation).
Orgasm in women is associated with
irregular contractions of the voluntary
muscles of the walls of the vagina and,
in some women, of the uterus, followed
by relief of congestion in the pelvic
area. Some women experience multiple
orgasms if stimulation is continued.
Orgasm is followed by a refractory phase
ORTHO- ORGANELLE
Oand also occurs with asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (see pul-
monary disease, chronic obstructive).
orthoptics Techniques used mainly in
children to measure and evaluate squint,
including eye exercises, assessment of
monocular and binocular vision, and
measures to combat amblyopia.
orthotics Use of appliances to support
or correct weakened or deformed joints.
os An anatomical term for a bone; also
refers to an opening in the body, as in
the cervical os (entrance to the uterus).
Osgood每Schlatter disease Painful en-
largement and tenderness of the tibial
tuberosity (the bony prominence of the
tibia), which occurs most commonly in
boys aged between 10 and 14. It results
from excessive, repetitive pulling of the
quadriceps muscle, due to repeated exer-
cise. The disorder often clears up without
treatment; severe pain may require
physiotherapy or immobilization of the
knee in a plaster cast.
osmosis The passage of a solventfrom a
weaker solution to a more concentrated
one through a semipermeable membrane.
All body cells are surrounded by such
membranes, which allow water, salts, sim-
plesugars (such as glucose), and amino
acids (but not proteins) to pass through.
Therefore, osmosis plays an important
part in regulating the distribution of water
and other substances in body tissues.
ossicle A small bone, especially any of the
3 tiny bones in the middle ear (malleus,
incus, and stapes) that conduct sound
from the eardrum to the inner ear.
OSSICLE
orthodontic appliances Fixed or re-
movable devices, commonly known as
braces,worn to correct malocclusion, or
to reposition overcrowded or buck teeth.
Usually fitted during childhood and
adolescence, they move teeth using
sustainedgentle pressure. A fixed appli-
ancehas brackets attached to the teeth
through which an arch wire is threaded
and tightened to exert pressure. These
are usually kept in place for about a year,
after which time a retainer plate may be
needed to hold the teeth inplace until
tooth and jaw growth has finished. 
Removable appliances, consisting of a
plastic plate with attachments that
anchor  over the back teeth, are used
when only one or a few teeth need cor-
recting. They apply force by means of
springs, wire bows, screws, or rubber
bands fitted to the plate.
orthodontics A branch of  dentistry
concerned with preventing and  treating
malocclusion. The procedures are usually
performed while teeth are developing
and still relatively manoeuvrable, but
can also be of benefit in adulthood.
An orthodontist may first make mod-
els of the teeth (see  impression, dental)
and take X-rays of the head and jaws.
Certain teeth, often premolars, may be
extracted to make room for the remain-
ing teeth. Poorly positioned teeth are
then moved by gentle pressure exerted
by orthodontic appliances. 
orthognathic surgery An operation to
correct deformity of the jaw and the
severe  malocclusion that is invariably
associated with it.  The bones of the jaw
are repositioned under general anaesthe-
sia, and often require splinting (see
splinting, dental) until they heal.
orthopaedics The branch of surgery con-
cernedwith disorders of the bones and
joints and their associated muscles, ten-
dons, and ligaments. Procedures include
setting broken bones and applying casts;
treating dislocations, slipped discs,
arthritis, and back problems; treating
bone tumours and birth defects of the
skeleton; and repairing or replacing hip,
knee, or finger joints.
orthopnoea Difficulty in breathing when
lying flat. Orthopnoea is a symptom of
heart failure and  pulmonary oedema,
420
ORTHODONTIC APPLIANCES OSSICLE
O
Incus
Malleus
Stapes
LOCATION
OSSICLES 
OF EAR
Outer 
ear Inner ear
Middle ear
Eardrum ossification The process by which bone
is formed, renewed, and repaired, starting
in the embryo and continuing through-
out life. There are 3 main situations in
which ossification occurs: bone growth,
during which new bone forms at the
epiphyses (ends) of bones; bone renew-
al as part of normal regeneration; and
bone repair following a fracture. 
In newborn babies, the diaphysis (shaft)
has begun to ossify and is composed
mainly of bone, while the epiphyses are
made of cartilage that gradually hard-
ens. In children, growth plates produce
new cartilage to lengthen the bones,
and further bone forms at secondary
ossification centres in the epiphyses. By
the age of 18, the shafts, growth plates,
and epiphyses have all ossified and
fused into continuous bone.
osteitis Inflammation of bone. The most
common cause is infection (see  osteo-
myelitis). Other causes are Paget＊s disease
and hyperparathyroidism.
osteitis deformans An alternative term
for Paget＊s disease.
osteo- A prefix denoting a relationship
to bone, as in osteoporosis, a condition
in which the bones thin and weaken.
osteoarthritis A common  joint disease
characterized by degeneration of the
cartilage that lines joints or by formation
of  osteophytes, leading to pain, stiff-
ness, and occasionally loss of function.
Osteoarthritis is due to wear and tear on
421
joints, weight-bearing joints being the
most commonly affected.Weakness and
shrinkage of surrounding muscles may
occur if pain prevents the joint from
being used regularly. Affected joints
become enlarged and distorted by osteo-
phytes. Osteoarthritis occurs in almost
all people over 60, although not all have
symptoms. Factors that lead to its earlier
development include excessive wear of,
or injury to, a joint; congenital deformi-
ty or misalignment of bones in a joint;
obesity; or inflammation from a disease
such as gout. Severe osteoarthritis affects
3 times as many women as men.
There is no cure for osteoarthritis.
Symptoms can be relieved by nonsteroid-
al anti-inflammatory drugs, analgesics,
injections of  corticosteroid drugs into
affected joints, and  physiotherapy. In
overweight people, weight loss often
provides relief of symptoms. Surgery for
severe osteoarthritis includes arthro-
plasty and arthrodesis.
osteochondritis dissecans Degenera-
tion of a bone just under a joint surface,
causing fragments of bone and cartilage
to become separated, which may cause
the joint to lock. The condition common-
lyaffects the knee and usually starts in
adolescence. Symptoms include aching
discomfort and intermittent swelling of
the affected joint.
If a fragment has not completely sepa-
rated from the bone, the joint may be
OSTEOCHONDRITIS DISSECANS
O
OSSIFICATION
OSSIFICATION
Blood
vessel
Diaphysis
(shaft) is
already
ossified
Epiphysis
consists of
cartilage
Growth
plate 
Marrow
cavity
LONG BONE OF A CHILD LONG BONE OF A NEWBORN LONG BONE OF AN ADULT
Epiphysis
Growth
plate
produces
cartilage 
to lengthen
bone
Blood
vessels
form new
branches
to nourish
growing
tissue
Secondary
ossification
centre
Articular 
cartilage
protects
end of
bone
Ossified
growth
plate
Marrow
cavity422
immobilized in a  plaster  cast to allow
reattachment. Loose bone or cartilage
fragments in the knee are removed dur-
ing  arthroscopy. Disruption to the
smoothness of the joint surface increas-
es the risk of osteoarthritis.
osteochondritis juvenilis Inflamma-
tion of an  epiphysis (growing end of
bone) in children and adolescents, caus-
ingpain, tenderness, and restricted
movement if the epiphysis forms part of
a joint. The inflammation leads to soft-
ening of the bone, which may result in
deformity. The condition may bedue to
disruption of the bone＊s blood supply.
There are several types: Perthes＊ disease;
Scheuermann＊s disease, which affects
several adjoining vertebrae; and other
types that affect certain bones in the
foot and wrist.
The affected bone may be immobi-
lized in an orthopaedic brace or plaster
cast. In Perthes＊ disease, surgery may be
required to prevent more deformity. The
bone usually regenerates within 3 years
and rehardens, but deformity may be
permanent and increases the risk of
osteoarthritis in later life.
osteochondroma A noncancerous bone
tumour, which is formed from a stalk 
of bone capped with cartilage, and
appears as a hard round swelling near a
joint. An osteochondroma develops in
late childhood and early adolescence,
usually from the side of a long bone
near the knee or shoulder. The tumour
causes problems only if it interferes
with movement of tendons or the sur-
rounding joint, in which case it may be
removed surgically. Large osteochondro-
mascan interfere with skeletal growth,
causing deformity.
osteochondrosis See osteochondritis
juvenilis.
osteodystrophy Any generalized bone
defect due to metabolic disorders.Types
of osteodystrophy include rickets; osteo-
malacia;  osteoporosis due to Cushing＊s
syndrome or excessive intake of cortico-
steroiddrugs; and bone cysts and bone
mass reduction associated with chronic
kidney failure or hyperparathyroidism. In
adults, an osteodystrophy is usually
reversible if the underlying cause is
treated before bone deformity occurs.
osteogenesis imperfecta A congenital
condition characterized by abnormally
brittle bones that are unusually suscep-
tible to fractures. The condition is caused
by an inherited defect in the connective
tissue that forms the basic material of
bone. Severely affected infants are born
with multiple fractures and a soft skull
and do not usually survive. Others have
many fractures during infancy and child-
hood, often as a result of normal
handling and activities, and it may be
difficult to distinguish the condition from
child abuse. A common sign of the con-
dition is that the whites of the eyes are
abnormally thin, making them appear
blue. Sufferers may also be deaf due to
otosclerosis. Very mild cases may not be
detected until adolescence or later.
There is no specific treatment. Frac-
tures are immobilized and usually heal
quickly, but they may cause shortening
and deformity of the limbs, resulting in
abnormal, stunted growth. Skull frac-
tures may cause brain damage or death.
Parents may have genetic counselling to
estimate the risk in future children.
Severe cases can be diagnosed prena-
tally by ultrasound scanning.
osteogenic sarcoma see osteosarcoma.
osteoid osteoma A  bone disorder in
which a tiny abnormal area of bone, usu-
allyin  a long bone, causes deep pain,
which is typically worse at night. The
condition is cured by removing the area
of bone. (See also osteoma.)
osteoma A hard, noncancerous, usually
small tumour that may occur on any
bone. Surgical removal may be neces-
sary if an osteoma causes symptoms by
pressing on surrounding structures.
osteomalacia Softening, weakening, and
demineralization of bones in adults due
to vitaminD deficiency. Osteomalacia is
rare in developed countries; it most
commonly affects housebound, elderly,
and dark-skinned people who live in
countries that have less sunlight than
their country of origin.
Healthy bone production requires cal-
cium and phosphorus, which cannot be
absorbed from the diet without suffi-
cient vitamin D (found in certain foods
and manufactured by the skin in sun-
light). Causes of osteomalacia include a
OSTEOCHONDRITIS JUVENILISOSTEOMALACIA
Osystems operate in unison, and that dis-
turbances in  one system can alter the
functions of others. Theosteopath uses
manipulation; rhythmic stretching, and
pressure to restore movement to the
joints; and traditional diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures to diagnose and
treat dysfunction.
osteopetrosis A very rare inherited dis-
order in which bones harden and become
denser. Deficiency of one of the 2 types of
bone cell responsible for healthy bone
growth results in a disruption of normal
bone structure. In its mildest form, there
may be no symptoms; more severe forms
of osteopetrosis result in abnormally
high susceptibility to  fractures; stunted
growth; deformity; and  anaemia. Pres-
sure on nerves may cause  blindness,
deafness, and facial paralysis.
Most treatments for osteopetrosis aim
to reduce the severity of symptoms.
Bone marrow transplants of cells from
which healthy bone cells might develop
are undertaken in some cases. 
osteophyte An outgrowth of  bone at
the boundary of a joint. The formation
of osteophytes is a characteristic fea-
ture of osteoarthritis that contributes to
the deformity and restricted movement
of affected joints.
osteoporosis Loss of bone tissue, caus-
ing the bone to become brittle and
fracture easily. Bone thinning is a natural
part of aging. However, women are espe-
cially vulnerable to loss of bone density
after menopause,because their  ovaries
no longer produce  oestrogenhormones,
which help maintain bone mass.
diet low in vitamin D; malabsorption in
conditions such as coeliac disease or fol-
lowing intestinal surgery; or insufficient
exposure to sunlight.
Osteomalacia causes bone pain, mus-
cle weakness, and, if the blood level of
calcium is very low,  tetany. Weakened
bones are vulnerable  to distortion and
fractures. Treatment is with a diet rich
in vitamin D and regular supplements.
Calcium supplements may be given if
osteomalacia is due to malabsorption.
osteomyelitis Infection, usually by bac-
teria, of  bone and  bone marrow. It is
relatively rare in developed countries
but is more common in children, most
often affecting the long arm and leg
bones and vertebrae; in adults, it usual-
ly affects the pelvis and  vertebrae. In
acute osteomyelitis, the infection (usu-
ally  STAPHYLOCOCCUSAUREUS)enters the
bloodstream via a skin wound or as a
result of infection elsewhere in the
body. The infected bone and marrow
become inflamed, and pus forms, caus-
ing fever, severe pain and tenderness in
the bone, and inflammation and swelling
of the skin over the affected area.
Prompt treatmentover several weeks
or months with high doses of antibiotic
drugs usually cures acute osteomyelitis.
If the condition fails to respond, surgery
is performed to expose the bone, clean
out areas of infected and dead bone,
and drain the pus.
Chronic osteomyelitis may develop if
acute osteomyelitis is neglected or fails
to respond to treatment; after a com-
pound  fracture; or, occasionally, as a
result of  tuberculosis spreading from
another part of the body. The condition
causes constant pain in the affected
bone. Complications include persistent
deformity and, in children, arrest of
growth in the affected bone. In the later
stages of the disease,  amyloidosis may
develop. Chronic osteomyelitis requires
surgical removal of all affected bone,
sometimes followed by a  bone graft;
antibiotic drugs are also prescribed. 
osteopathy A system of diagnosis and
treatment that recognizes the role of the
musculoskeletal system in the healthy
functioning of the body. The basic prin-
ciple of  osteopathy is that all body
423
OSTEOPOROSIS OSTEOMYELITIS
O
OSTEOPOROSIS
Thinned, weakened bone
MICROSCOPIC VIEW OF BONE424
Other causes of osteoporosis include
removal of the ovaries; a diet that is
deficient in calcium; certain hormonal
disorders; prolonged treatment with
corticosteroid drugs; and prolonged
immobility. Osteoporosis is most com-
mon in heavy smokers and drinkers,
and in excessively thin people.
The first sign of osteoporosis is often a
fracture, typically just above the wrist or
at the top of the  femur. One or several
vertebrae may fracture spontaneously
and cause the bones to crumble, lead-
ing to progressive height loss or pain
due to compression of a spinal nerve.
Osteoporosis is confirmed using bone
X-rays and densitometry. Bone loss can
be minimized by adequate dietary cal-
cium, and regular, sustained exercise to
build bones and maintain their strength.
Long-term hormone replacement therapy
after the menopause can prevent osteo-
porosis in women. Bisphosphonate drugs
may be given to prevent bone loss.
osteosarcoma A cancerous tumour of
the bone  that spreads rapidly to the
lungs and, less commonly, to other areas.
An osteosarcoma may occur in adoles-
cents for no known reason (usually in a
long bone of the arm or leg or around the
knee, hip, or shoulder). In elderly peo-
ple, osteosarcomas may develop in
several bones as a late, rare complica-
tion of  Paget＊s disease. The tumour
causes pain and swelling of the affected
bone if it occurs near the surface.
The condition may be treated by
radiotherapy, but the affected bone is
usually surgically removed. Sometimes
it is replaced by a bone graft or artificial
bone, but most often, an amputation
and a prosthesis (see limb, artificial) are
required. Anticancer drugs improve the
outlook; about half of those in whom
the disease is discovered early are cured.
osteosclerosis Increased  bone density,
visible on X-rays as an area of extreme
whiteness. Localized osteosclerosis may
be caused by a severe injury that com-
presses the bone, osteoarthritis, chronic
osteomyelitis, or an osteoma. Osteoscle-
rosis occurs throughout the body in the
inherited bone disorder osteopetrosis.
osteotomy Surgery to change the align-
ment of, or shorten or lengthen, a bone,
by cutting it. Osteotomy is used to cor-
rect a  halluxvalgus that has causeda
bunion;  coxavara (a hip deformity); or
deformity due to congenital hip disloca-
tion (see  hip, congenital dislocation of).
The procedure is also used to straighten
a long bone that has healed crookedly
after a  fracture, or to shorten the unin-
jured leg if a fractured leg has shortened
during healing (see leg, shortening of).
ostomy The term used to describe a
surgical opening or a junction of 2 hol-
low organs (for example, colostomy).
otalgia The medical term for earache.
OTCdrug See over-the-counter drug.
otitis externa An ear infection affecting
the outer-ear canal. Otitis externa usu-
ally causes  inflammation and swelling,
discharge, and, in some people, eczema
around the opening of the canal. The ear
may be itchy and painful and blocked
with pus, causing deafness.
Generalized infection of the canal, and
sometimes of the pinna (external ear),
may be due to a fungal or bacterial
infection. The ear may also sometimes
become inflamed as part of a generalized
skin disorder such as atopic eczema or
seborrhoeic dermatitis.
Often, the only treatment required for
otitis externa is to keep the ear thor-
oughly clean and dry until the infection
has cleared. Locally acting preparations
containing  antibioticdrugs,  antifungal
drugs, or  corticosteroiddrugs may be
used. Oral antibiotics may be given to
treat severe bacterial infections.
otitis media Inflammation of the mid-
dle ear. This condition is due to a viral
or bacterial infection extending up the
eustachian tube, which runs from the
back of the nose to the middle ear. The
tube may become blocked by inflamma-
tion or enlarged adenoids, causing fluid
and pus to accumulate in the middle
ear rather than draining away through
the tube. Children, particularly those
under 7 years, are especially suscepti-
ble to otitis media, and some children
have recurrent attacks.
Acute otitis media can cause sudden
severe earache, a feeling of fullness in
the ear, deafness, tinnitus, and fever. The
eardrum may burst, in which case healing
usually occurs within a few weeks. The
OSTEOSARCOMA OTITIS MEDIA
Ocondition is diagnosed by examination
of the middle ear with an otoscope; the
eardrum will appear red and possibly
bulging outwards. Treatment is with
analgesic drugs, and sometimes  antibi-
oticdrugs, although many childhood
infections are viral.
One possible complication of otitis
media is glue ear (chronic secretory oti-
tis media), in which a thick fluid builds
up in the ear and affects hearing. It may
develop following severe or recurrent oti-
tis media, particularly in children. Other
complications include hearing impair-
ment and a cholesteatoma. In rare cases,
the infection responsible for otitis media
spreads inwards to cause mastoiditis.
oto- A prefix that denotes a relationship
to the  ear, as in  otorrhoea (discharge
from the ear).
otoacoustic emission An echo emitted
by the inner  ear in response to sound.
The emission is produced only by a nor-
mally functioning ear and is recorded in
a test to detect impaired hearing.
otomycosis A fungal  ear infection that
causes inflammation of the ear canal
and external ear (see otitis externa).
otoplasty Cosmetic or reconstructive
surgery on the external ear. This proce-
dure is usually carried out to make
protruding ears lie closer to the head.
Otoplasty may also be performed to
construct a missing ear in a child born
with part or all of oneear missing, or to
reconstruct a damaged ear.
otorhinolaryngology A surgical spec-
iality, also known as ENT surgery, that is
concerned with diseases of the  ear,
nose, and  throat. ENT specialists treat
sinus problems,  otitismedia,  glue ear,
tonsillitis, minor hearing loss, otosclero-
sis, M谷ni豕re＊sdisease, airway problems
in children, uncontrollable nosebleeds,
and cancer of the larynx and sinuses.
otorrhoea A discharge of pus or other
fluid from the ear (see  ear, discharge
from).
otosclerosis A disorder of the middle
ear that causes progressive  deafness.
The condition usually develops in both
ears. Otosclerosis occurs when over-
growth of bone immobilizes the  stapes
(the innermost one of the three tiny
bones in the middle ear). As a result,
sound vibrations are prevented from
passing along the bone to the inner ear.
To an affected person, sounds are muf-
fled but can be distinguished more
easily if there is background noise.
Otosclerosis frequently runs in fami-
lies, and symptoms usually start to
appear in early adulthood. The condi-
tion affects more women than men, and
often develops during pregnancy. Hear-
ing loss progresses slowly over 10 to 15
years and is often accompanied by  tin-
nitus and, more rarely, vertigo. A degree
of sensorineural deafness may develop,
making high tones difficult to hear and
causing the sufferer to speak loudly. 
The condition is diagnosed by hearing
tests. It can be cured by stapedectomy, a
surgical procedure in which the stapes
is replaced by a tiny piston, which
moves through a hole created in the
inner ear. Because the piston can move
freely, it can transmit sound vibrations
to the inner ear. Alternatively, a hearing-
aid can markedlyimprove hearing.
425
OTOSCLEROSIS OTO-
O
OTOSCLEROSIS
LOCATION
Overgrowth 
of bone
immobilizes
base of stapes
Outer-ear canal
Eardrum
Middle ear
Inner ear
Stapesotoscope An instrument, also called an
auroscope, for examining the outer-ear
canal and the eardrum. An otoscope
illuminates and magnifies the inside of
the ear. Otoscopy (examination using
an otoscope) is performed to detect
physical abnormalities such as inflam-
mation or pus in the outer-ear canal
(see  otitis externa) and distortion or
rupture of the eardrum.
ototoxicity Toxic damage to the struc-
tures of the inner  ear. High doses of
certain drugs (such as  aminoglycoside
antibiotics) may cause this type of ear
damage, resulting in impaired hearing
and balance.
out-of-body experience A feeling of
leaving one＊s body and observing oneself
from another dimension. The experi-
ence, which is thought to be due to
disturbance of brain function, is report-
ed by some patients following a general
anaesthetic or a medical emergency.
outpatient treatment Medical care on
a same-day basis in a hospital or clinic. 
ovarian cyst An abnormal, fluid-filled
swelling in an  ovary. Ovarian cysts are
common and, in most cases, noncancer-
ous. The most common type, a follicular
cyst, is one in which the egg-producing
follicle enlarges and fills with fluid.
Cysts may also occur in the corpus
luteum, a mass of tissue that forms from
the follicle after  ovulation. Other types
include  dermoid cysts and cancerous
cysts (see ovary, cancer of).
Ovarian cysts are often symptomless,
but some cause abdominal discomfort,
pain during intercourse, or irregularities
of menstruation such as  amenorrhoea,
menorrhagia, or dysmenorrhoea. Severe
abdominal pain, nausea, and fever may
develop if twisting or rupture of a cyst
occurs. This condition requires surgery.
An ovarian cyst may be discovered
during a routine pelvicexamination and
its position and size confirmed by ultra-
sound or  laparoscopy. In many cases,
simple ovarian cysts 每 thin-walled or
fluid-filled cysts 每 resolve themselves.
However, complex cysts (such as der-
moid cysts) usually require surgical
removal. If an ovarian cyst is particu-
larly large, the ovary may need to be
removed (see oophorectomy).
426
ovary One of a pair of almond-shaped
glands situated on either side of the
uterus immediately below the opening
of the  fallopiantubes. Each ovary con-
tains numerous cavities called  follicles,
in which egg cells (see ovum) develop.
The ovaries also produce the female sex
hormones oestrogen and progesterone. 
ovary, cancer of A malignant growth of
the ovary. The cancer may be either pri-
mary (arising in the ovary) or secondary
(due to the spread of cancer from
another part of the body). Ovarian cancer
can occur at any age but is most com-
mon after 50 and in women who have
never had children. A family history of
cancer of the ovary, breast, or colon,
especially in close relatives under 50, is
an important risk factor. Taking oral con-
traceptives reduces the risk.
In most cases, ovarian cancer causes
no symptoms until it is widespread. The
first symptoms may include vague dis-
comfort and swelling in the abdomen;
nausea and vomiting; abnormal vaginal
bleeding; and ascites.
If ovarian cancer is suspected, a doc-
tor will carry out a physical examination
to detect any swellings in the pelvis. A
laparoscopy will usually be performed
to confirm the diagnosis.
OTOSCOPE OVARY, CANCER OF
O
OVARY
Uterus 
Ovary
Fallopian tube 
LOCATION
STRUCTURE OF AN OVARY
Ligament
Mature egg follicle
Egg
Immature 
egg follicle
Blood vessel
Empty follicle427
Treatment is by surgical removal of the
growth or as much cancerous tissue as
possible. This usually involves salpingo-
oophorectomy and hysterectomy followed
by radiotherapy and anticancer drugs.
ovary, disorders of Diseases and ab-
normalities of the ovaries can occur for
various reasons. Absence of ovaries, or
their failure to develop normally, is rare
and is usually due to a chromosomal
abnormality (see  Turner＊s syndrome).
Oophoritis (inflammation of an ovary)
may result from infections such as gon-
orrhoea or  pelvic inflammatory disease.
Ovarian cysts are common and usually
noncancerous. Polycystic ovary syndrome
is due to an imbalance of sex hormones.
Ovarian cancer (see  ovary, cancer of)
occurs mainly in women over 50. Ovar-
ian failure causes premature menopause
in about 5 per cent of women.
ovary, polycystic A condition, also
called Stein每Leventhal syndrome, that
is characterized by oligomenorrhea or
amenorrhoea (scanty or absent periods),
infertility, hirsutism (excessive hairiness),
and  obesity. Often, there are multiple
ovarian cysts. Most women with poly-
cystic ovaries begin menstruation at a
normal age, but after a year or two peri-
ods become highly irregular and then
cease. Hirsutism and obesity occur in
about 50 per cent of cases.
The condition results from an imbal-
ance of two  gonadotrophin hormones:
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and
luteinizing hormone (LH). This hormon-
al imbalance is associated with raised
levels of testosterone and oestrogen.
Treatments include clomifene and oral
contraceptives. Polycystic ovaries are
often associated with high oestrogen
levels in the body, which increase the
risk of endometrial cancer (see  uterus,
cancer of); treatment with progesterone
may be recommended for this problem.
overbite Overlapping of the lower front
teeth by the upper ones. A slight degree
of overbite is normal as the upper jaw is
larger than the lower jaw. In malocclu-
sion, overbite may be greater than
normal or the lower teeth may project
in front of the upper teeth.
overbreathing A common name for
hyperventilation.
overcrowding, dental Excessive crowd-
ing of the  teeth so that they are unable
to assume their normal positions in the
jaw. Dental overcrowding is commonly
inherited and may occur because the
teeth are too large for the jaw or the jaw
is too small to accommodate the teeth.
Premature loss of primary molar (back)
teeth can cause the permanent teeth
beneath them to move out of position
and crowd the teeth further forward.
Overcrowded teeth may lead to maloc-
clusion or may prevent certain teeth from
erupting through the gum (see  impac-
tion, dental). They can be difficult to clean,
increasing the risk of dental decay (see
caries, dental) and periodontal disease.
Teeth may need to be extracted to
allow room for others. Usually an ortho-
dontic appliance is fitted to the remaining
teeth to position them correctly.
over-the-counter (OTC) drug A drug
that can be bought without a prescrip-
tion at a chemist＊s or other store.
overuse injury Also called  repetitive
strain injury, a term, for any injury caused
by repetitive movementof part of the
body. Symptomsinclude pain and stiff-
ness in the affectedjoints and muscles.
Examples include epicondylitis: painful
inflammation of one of the bony promi-
nences at the elbow, caused by the pull
of the attached forearm muscles during
strenuous activities (see golfer＊s elbow;
tennis elbow). Overuse injuries of the fin-
gers,thumb, and wrist joints may affect
assembly-line and keyboard workers, and
musicians; injuries of the neck may affect
violinists. Rest relieves the symptoms.
A change in the technique used during
the activity may prevent recurrence.
overweight See obesity.
ovulation The development and release
of an ovum (egg) from a follicle within
an  ovary. During the 1st half of the
menstrual cycle,  follicle-stimulating hor-
mone (FSH) causes several ova to mature
in the ovary. At mid-cycle,  luteinizing
hormone (LH) causes 1 ripe ovum to be
released. Signs of ovulation include a
rise in body temperature, changes in the
cervical mucus, and sometimes mild
abdominal pain (see mittelschmerz). A
yellow mass of tissue called the corpus
luteum, which forms from the follicle
OVULATION OVARY, DISORDERS OF
O428
after  ovulation, releases progesterone
during the 2nd half of the cycle.
After its release, the ovum travels along
the fallopian tube and, if fertilization does
not occur, is shed during menstruation.
Regular menstruation usually means that
ovulation is occurring, except around
puberty and approaching the menopause.
ovum The egg cell (female cell of repro-
duction). An ovum contains a nucleus
suspended in cytoplasm (a gel-like sub-
stance) and is surrounded by a protective
layer, the zona pellucida. 
About 1 million immature ova are pre-
sent in each  ovary at birth, but only
about 200 per ovary mature to be
released at  ovulation. A  fertilized ovum
develops into an embryo.
oxazepam A benzodiazepinedrug used
as a short-term treatment for  anxiety.
Oxazepam may cause dependence if it
is taken regularly for more than 2 weeks
(see drug dependence).
oximeter An instrument used for mea-
suring the oxygen content of the blood.
oxprenolol A  beta-blocker drug that is
used in the treatment of  hypertension,
angina, and  cardiac arrhythmias. Ox-
prenolol may also be used to relieve
symptoms of anxiety and control those
of hyperthyroidism.
oxybutynin A drug that is used to treat
frequent urination (see  urination,  fre-
quent) by increasing the bladder＊s
capacity. Common side effects include
dry mouth and blurred vision.
oxygen A colourless, odourless gas that
makes up 21 per cent of the Earth＊s atmo-
sphere. Oxygen is essential for almost all
forms of life, including humans, because
it is necessary for the metabolic ※burn-
ing§ of foods to produce energy 每 a
process that takes place in body cells
and is known as aerobic metabolism.
Oxygen is absorbed through the lungs
and into the blood, where it binds to
the haemoglobin in red blood cells. As
oxygen-rich blood circulates around the
body, the oxygen is released from the
red blood cells into the body tissues.
Additional supplies of oxygen are used
to treat conditions suchas severe bron-
chitis or hypoxia. High-pressure oxygen
(see  hyperbaric oxygen treatment) is
sometimes used to treat decompression
sickness or  carbon monoxide poisoning.
(See also ozone.)
oxygen concentrator  An appliance
used in  oxygen therapy that separates
oxygen from the air and mixes it back in
at a greater concentration. This oxygen-
enriched air is delivered through a tube
for prolonged inhalation. The appliance
is used by people who have persistent
hypoxia due to severe chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease (see pulmonary
disease, chronic obstructive). (See also
hyperbaric oxygen treatment.)
oxygen therapy The process of supply-
ing a person with oxygen-enriched air 
to relieve severe  hypoxia (inadequate
OVUM OXYGEN THERAPY
O
Nasal
cannulas
Oxygen tube
Oxygen
concentrator
OXYGEN THERAPY
Humidifier
keeps the
oxygen
moist 
HOME OXYGEN THERAPY
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Zona pellucida
Cell from
ovarian follicle
OVUM429
oxygen in body tissues). The oxygen is
usually delivered through a face-mask or
a nasal cannula(a length of narrow plas-
tic tubing with two prongs that are
inserted into the nostrils). Piped oxygen
is used in hospitals; oxygen in cylinders
can be used at home for acute attacks
of hypoxia, such as those occurring in
severe asthma. Long-term therapy for
people with persistent hypoxia may in-
volve the use of an oxygen concentrator.
(See also hyperbaric oxygen treatment.)
oxymetazoline A  decongestant drug
used in the treatment of allergic rhinitis,
sinusitis, and the common cold.
oxytetracycline A tetracycline antibiotic
drug that is used to treat chlamydial in-
fections such as nongonococcal urethritis.
It is also used for a variety of other
infective conditions, including bronchi-
tis and pneumonia; in addition, the drug
may be used to treat severe acne.
Side effects may include nausea, vom-
iting, diarrhoea, skin rash, and increased
sensitivity of the skin to sunlight. Oxy-
tetracycline may discolour developing
teeth, and is not given to children under
12 or to pregnant women.
oxytocin A  hormone produced by the
pituitary gland. Oxytocin causes uterine
contractions during labour and stimulates
milk-flow in breast-feeding women.
Synthetic oxytocin is used for  induc-
tion of labour. It is given by intravenous
infusion to produce uterine contractions.
It is also often given with ergotamine as
a single dose after delivery to prompt
placental separation and expulsion, to
reduce blood flow, or to empty the
uterus after an incomplete miscarriage
or a fetal death. A possible adverse
effect of synthetic oxytocin is abnorm-
ally strong, painful contractions. Rare
side effects include  nausea, vomiting,
palpitations, and allergicreactions.
oxyuriasis An alternative name for
enterobiasis or threadworm infestation.
ozena A severe and rare form of rhinitis,
in which the mucus membrane in the
nose wastes away and a thick nasal dis-
charge dries to form crusts. Ozena often
causes severe halitosis.
ozone A rare form of oxygen, ozone is a
poisonous, faintly blue gas that is pro-
duced by the action of electrical
discharges (such as lightning) on oxy-
gen molecules. Ozone occurs naturally
in the upper atmosphere, where it
screens the Earth from most of the
Sun＊s harmful ultraviolet radiation. The
ozone layer is being depleted by atmo-
spheric pollutants, allowing increasing
amounts of ultraviolet radiation to
reach the Earth＊s surface.This problem
could lead to a rise in the  incidence of
skin cancer and cataracts, as well as hav-
ing other potentially hazardous effects.
OZONE OXYMETAZOLINE
O430
pacemaker A small device that supplies
electrical impulses to the heart to main-
tain a regular  heartbeat. Apacemakeris
implanted when the  sinoatrial  node in
the heart malfunctions, or when the pas-
sage of the electrical  impulses that
stimulate heart contractions is impaired
(see heart block; sick sinus syndrome). 
Pacemakers can be fixed-rate (which
discharge impulses at a steady rate) or
demand (which discharge only when the
heart rate slows or a beat is missed).
They may be external (used as a tempo-
rary measure) or internal (implanted in
the chest). Some types can increase the
heart rate during exercise or change an
abnormal rhythm into a normal one. 
paclitaxel An  anticancerdrug that is
used to treat certain types of cancer,
such as ovarian cancer (see ovary, cancer
of) and breast cancer. The possible side
effects of paclitaxel can include nausea,
vomiting,  anaemia, and increased sus-
ceptibility to infection.
paediatrics The branch of medicine that
is concerned with the development of
children, and the diagnosis, treatment,
and prevention of childhood diseases.
paedophilia Sexual attraction to chil-
dren. (See also child abuse; incest.)
Paget＊s disease A common disorder of
the middle-aged and elderly, in which the
formation of bone is disrupted. Affected
bones become weak, thick, and deform-
ed. Paget＊s disease, which is also called
osteitis deformans, usually affects the
pelvis, skull, collarbone, vertebrae, and
long bones of the leg. The disorder may
run in families and mostly affects men.
There are often no symptoms, but if
symptoms do occur, the most common
ones are bone pain and deformity, espe-
cially bowing of the legs. Affected bones
are prone to fracture. Skull changes may
lead to leontiasis (distortion of the facial
bones producing a lion-like appearance)
and to damage to the inner ear, some-
times causing deafness, tinnitus, vertigo,
or headaches.
The disorder is diagnosed by  X-rays
and blood tests. Most people do not need
treatment, or only need analgesic drugs.
In more severe cases, treatment with
drugs such as  calcitonin may be pre-
scribed or surgery may be needed.
Paget＊s disease of the nipple A rare
type of breast cancer in which a tumour
develops in the  nipple. The disease
resembles eczema and can cause itching
and a burning feeling. A non-healing
sore may develop. Without treatment,
the tumour may spread into the breast.
Diagnosis is made with a biopsy. 
pain A localized sensation that can range
from mild discomfort to an excruciating
experience. Stimulation of sensory nerve
endings called nociceptors in the skin
leads to pain messages being sent to
the brain. Some nociceptors respond
only to severe stimulation, others to
warning stimuli. Pain receptors are pre-
sent in other structures, such as blood
vessels and tendons. Pain that may be
felt at a point some distance from the
cause is known as  referred pain.
Treatment for pain may include drugs,
electrical stimulation (TENS), surgery,
or therapies such as  acupuncture. (See
also pain relief, endorphins.)
painful arc syndrome A condition in
which pain occurs when the arm is raised
between 45 and 160 degrees from the
side. The usual cause is an inflamed
PACEMAKER PAINFUL ARC SYNDROME
P
Electrical
wires
Superior
vena
cava
Wire to right
ventricle
PACEMAKER
Pacemaker
Wire to
right
atrium
INTERNAL PACEMAKER IN POSITION
P431
tendon or bursa around the shoulder joint
being squeezed between the scapula and
humerus. Treatment includes physiother-
apy and injection of corticosteroid drugs.
painkillers See analgesic drugs.
pain relief The treatment of pain, usu-
ally with  analgesic drugs.  Paracetamol,
aspirin and codeine are the most widely
used drugs in this group. Pain accompa-
nied by  inflammation is often alleviated
by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatorydrugs
(NSAIDs). Severe pain may require treat-
ment with opioids, such as morphine.
Other methods of pain relief include
massage,  ice-packs, poultices, TENS, acu-
puncture, or hypnosis. Surgery to destroy
pain-transmitting nerves (as in a cordo-
tomy) is occasionally performed when
other treatments fail.
palate The roof of the mouth, which is
covered with  mucous membrane and
which separates the mouth from the
nasal cavity. At the front is the hard
palate, a plate of bone forming part of
the  maxilla. At the rear is the soft
palate, a flap of muscle and fibrous 
tissue that projects into the  pharynx.
(See also cleft lip and palate.)
palliative treatment Treatment that
relieves the symptoms of a disorder but
does not cure it.
pallor Abnormal paleness of the skin and
mucous membranes, particularly notice-
ablein  the face. Pallor is not always a
symptom of disease. It may be due to a
deficiency of the skin pigment melanin
that may affect people who spend very
little time in daylight. It is also a feature
of  albinism. In addition, pallor may be
caused by constriction of small blood
vessels in the skin, which may occur in
response to shock, severe pain, injury,
heavy blood loss, or fainting. 
Disorders that cause pallor include
anaemia,  pyelonephritis,  kidneyfailure,
and hypothyroidism. Leadpoisoning is a
rare cause.
palpation A technique used in physical
examination, in which parts of the body
are felt with the hands.
palpitation Awareness of the heartbeat
or a sensation of having a rapid and
forceful heartbeat. Palpitations are usu-
ally felt in tense situations, or after
strenuous exercise or a scare. When
experienced at rest or when calm, they
are usually due to  ectopic heartbeats
and are felt as fluttering or thumping in
the chest. Palpitations may also be 
due to  cardiac arrhythmias and  hyper-
thyroidism. Recurrent palpitations, or
those causing chest pain, breathless-
ness, or dizziness, may be investigated
by a 24-hour ECG  and  thyroid function
tests. Treatment depends on the cause.
palsy A term applied to certain forms of
paralysis, such as facial palsy.
panacea A claimed remedy for all dis-
eases. No such remedy is known.
pancreas A tapered gland that lies
across the back of the abdomen, behind
the stomach. The broadest part (head)
is on the right-hand side. The main part
(body) tapers from the head and extends
horizontally. The narrowest part  (tail) is
on the left near the spleen.
The pancreas has a digestive and a
hormonal function. It mostly consists of
exocrine tissue, which secretes diges-
tive enzymes into the duodenum via the
pancreatic duct. Also secreted is sodium
bicarbonate, which neutralizes stomach
acid entering the duodenum. The pan-
creas also contains groups of endocrine
cells, called the islets of Langerhans,
which secrete the hormones insulin and
glucagon. These hormones regulate the
level of glucose in the blood. 
The most common pancreatic disorder
is diabetes mellitus. 
PANCREAS PAINKILLERS
P
LOCATION
Pancreatic duct
PANCREAS
PANCREAS
PANCREATIC CELLS
Islet of
Langerhans
Digestive
cells
Head
Body
Tail432
pancreas, cancer of A cancerous tumour
of the exocrine tissue of the  pancreas.
The cause is unknown, but smoking and
a high intake of fats or alcohol may be
contributing factors. Symptoms include
upper abdominal pain, loss of appetite,
weight loss, and jaundice. There may also
be indigestion, nausea, vomiting, diar-
rhoea,  and tiredness. In many cases,
symptoms do not appear until the can-
cer has spread to other parts of the body.
Diagnosis usually requires  ultrasound
scanning,  CT scanning or  MRI of the
upper abdomen, or ERCP. In early stages,
pancreatectomy,  radiotherapy and  anti-
cancer drugs may provide a cure. In
later stages, little can be done apart
from provision of palliative treatment. 
pancreatectomy Removal of all or part
of the pancreas. Pancreatectomy may be
performed to treat pancreatitis or local-
ized cancer of the pancreas (see pancreas,
cancer of). Rarely, it is performed to treat
insulinomas. Pancreatectomy may lead
to diabetes mellitus and malabsorption.
pancreatin An oral preparation of pan-
creatic  enzymes required for digestion.
It is used to prevent malabsorption, and
it may be needed after pancreatectomy
or by people with pancreatic disorders. 
pancreatitis Inflammation of the  pan-
creas, which may be acute or  chronic.
The main causes of acute pancreatitis are
alcohol abuse and gallstones. Less com-
mon causes are injury, viral infections,
surgery on the biliary system, or certain
drugs. Chronic pancreatitis is usually due
to alcohol abuse. Rarer causes include
hyperlipidaemias, haemochromatosis, and
severe acute  pancreatitis. Chronic pan-
creatitis leads to permanent damage.
Acute pancreatitis is less damaging but
there may be recurrences.
Symptoms of acute pancreatitis are a
sudden attack of severe upper abdomi-
nal pain, which may spread to the back,
often with nausea and vomiting. Move-
ment often makes the pain worse. The
attack usually lasts about 48 hours.
Chronic pancreatitis usually has the
same symptoms, although the pain may
last from a few hours to several days,
and attacks become more frequent. If
there is no pain, the principal signs may
be malabsorption or diabetes mellitus.
Severe acute pancreatitis may lead to
hypotension, heart failure, kidney failure,
respiratory failure,  cysts, and  ascites.
Chronic pancreatitis may also lead to
the development of ascites and cysts,
as well as bile duct obstruction and dia-
betes mellitus.
A diagnosis may be made by  blood
tests, abdominal X-rays, ultrasound scan-
ning, CT scanning, MRI, or ERCP. Acute
pancreatitis is treated with  intravenous
infusion  of fluids and salts and opioid
analgesic drugs. In some cases, the gut
may be washed out with sterile fluid, or
a pancreatectomy may be performed and
any gallstones that are present removed.
Treatment for the chronicform is  with
painkillers,  insulin,  pancreatin, and, in
somecases, pancreatectomy.
pancreatography Imaging of the pan-
creas or its ducts using  CT scanning,
MRI, ultrasound scanning, X-rays (follow-
ing injection of a radiopaque contrast
medium into the pancreatic ducts dur-
ing exploratory surgery), or with ERCP.
pandemic A medical term applied to a
disease that occurs over a large geo-
graphical  area and that affects a high
proportion of the population; a wide-
spread epidemic.
panic attack A brief period of acute
anxiety, often dominated by an intense
fear of dying or losing one＊s reason. At-
tacks are unpredictable at first, but tend
to become associated with specific situ-
ations, such as a cramped lift.
Symptoms (a sense of breathing diffi-
culty, chest pains,  palpitations, feeling
light-headed, dizziness, sweating, trem-
bling, and faintness) begin suddenly.
Hyperventilation often occurs, causing a
pins-and-needles feeling, and feelings of
depersonalization and derealization. The
attacks end quickly. 
Panic attacks are generally a feature of
an  anxiety disorder,  agoraphobia, or
other  phobias. In some cases, such
attacks are part of a  somatization disor-
der or  schizophrenia.  Behaviour therapy
and relaxation exercises may be used in
treatment of this condition. 
panic disorder A type of anxiety disor-
der, characterized by recurrent  panic
attacks of intense anxiety and distress-
ing physical symptoms.
PANCREAS, CANCER OF PANIC DISORDER
P433
pantothenic acid One of the vitamins
in the vitamin B complex.
papain A naturally occurring mixture of
enzymes, including chymopapain, which
is found in pawpaws. Papain breaks
down proteins and has been used to
remove clotted blood and dead tissue
from wounds and ulcers.
papilla Any small, nipple-shaped pro-
jection from a tissue＊s surface, such as
the mammary papilla (the breast nipple).
papilloedema Swelling of the head of
the optic nerve, which is visible with an
ophthalmoscope. Also called optic disc
oedema, it usually  indicatesa  danger-
ous rise in the pressure within the skull,
sometimes caused by a brain tumour. 
papilloma A noncancerous growth of the
epithelium that resembles a wart and
most commonly affects the skin, tongue,
larynx, and urinary and digestive tracts.
pap smear See cervical smear test.
papule A small, solid, slightly raised
area of skin. Papules are usually less
than 5 mm in diameter, are raised or
flat, have a smooth or warty texture,
and are either pigmented or the colour
of the surrounding skin. 
par-/para- Prefixes that may mean be-
side or beyond, closely resembling or
related to, or faulty or abnormal.
para-aminobenzoic acid The active
ingredient of many  sunscreen prepara-
tions. Its abbreviation is PABA.
paracentesis A procedure in which a
body cavity is punctured with a needle
from the outside to remove fluid for
analysis, to relieve pressure from excess
fluid, or to instil drugs.
paracetamol An  analgesic drug, used
to treat mild pain and to reduce fever.
Paracetamol may rarely cause nausea or
rash. An overdose may cause liver dam-
age and can be fatal. 
paraesthesia Altered sensation in the
skin that occurs without a stimulus (see
pins-and-needles).
paraffinoma A tumour-like swelling
under the skin caused by prolonged
exposure to paraffin. Paraffinomas may
form in the lungs if paraffin is inhaled.
paraldehyde A  sedativedrug used to
stop prolonged epileptic  seizures. Par-
aldehyde can be administered as an
enema or by injection into a muscle. 
paralysis Complete or partial loss of
controlled movement caused by the in-
ability to contract 1 or more  muscles.
Paralysis may be temporary or perma-
nent. There may also be loss of feeling
in affected areas.
Paralysis of one half of the body is
called hemiplegia; paralysis of all 4 limbs
and the trunk is called quadriplegia. Para-
plegia is paralysis of both legs and
sometimes part of the trunk. Paralysis
may be flaccid, causing floppiness, or
spastic, causing rigidity.
Paralysis can be caused by brain disor-
ders such as stroke, brain tumour, brain
abscess, or  brain haemorrhage. Some
types of paralysis are caused by damage
to parts of the nervous system (such as
the  cerebellum and basal ganglia) con-
cerned with fine control of movement.
Paralysis can also be caused by damage
to or pressure on the spinal cord as a
result of injury or disc prolapse. Disea-
ses affecting the spinal cord (such as
multiple sclerosis and poliomyelitis) and
muscle disorders (such as muscular dys-
trophy) may also cause paralysis. Nerve
disorders, called neuropathies, may cause
varying degrees of paralysis.
The underlying cause is treated, if
possible, and  physiotherapy is used to
prevent joints from becoming locked
and to strengthen muscles and joints.
paralysis, periodic A rare, inherited
condition that affects young people.
Periodic paralysis is characterized by
episodes of muscle weakness, which
vary in frequency from daily to every few
years and last from a few minutes to a
few hours. In some cases, there is a drop
in the  potassium levels in the blood; in
others, the levels rise. A carbohydrate-
rich meal may trigger an attack. The
condition often clears up without treat-
ment by age 40.
paramedic A term for any health-care
worker other than a doctor, nurse, or
dentist. The term usually refers to ambu-
lance staff who attend accidents or
medical emergencies. 
paranoia A condition in which the cen-
tral feature is the  delusion that people
or events are especially connected to
oneself. The term paranoia may also be
used to describe feelings of persecution.
PARANOIA PANTOTHENIC ACID
P434
A paranoid person builds up an elabo-
rate set of beliefs based on the
interpretation of chance remarks or
events. Typical themes are persecution,
jealousy (see  jealousy, morbid), love,
and grandeur.
Paranoia may be  chronic or  acute.
Chronic paranoia may be caused by
brain damage, abuse of alcohol or am-
fetamines,  manic每depressive illness, or
schizophrenia and is likely in those with
a  personality disorder. Acute paranoia,
lasting for less than 6 months, may
occur in people, such as refugees, who
have experienced radical changes. In
shared paranoia (see folie 角 deux), delu-
sion develops because of a close
relationship with someone else who
has a delusion.
There are usually no other symptoms
of mental illness apart from occasional
hallucinations. In time, anger, suspicion,
and social isolation may become severe. 
If acute illness is treated early with
antipsychotic drugs, the outlook is good.
In longstanding paranoia, delusions are
usually firmly entrenched, but antipsy-
chotics may make them less prominent.
paraparesis Partial  paralysis or weak-
ness of both legs and sometimes part of
the trunk. 
paraphimosis Constriction of the penis
behind the glans (head) by an extremely
tight foreskin that has been pulled back,
causing swelling and pain. Paraphim-
osis often occurs as a complication of
an abnormally tight foreskin (see phimo-
sis). The foreskin can often be returned
manually to its normal position after
application of an ice-pack. Otherwise,
an injection or an operation to cut the
foreskin may be necessary. Circumcision
prevents recurrence.
paraplegia Weakness or  paralysis of
both legs and sometimes of part of the
trunk, often accompanied by loss of
feeling and by loss of urinary control.
Paraplegia is a result of nerve damage
in the brain or spinal cord. 
parapsychology The branch of  psy-
chology dealing with experiences and
events that cannot be scientifically
accounted for. These include forms of
extrasensory perception (ESP), such as
telepathy (communication of thoughts),
telekinesis (movement of objects with
the mind), and precognition (being able
to see into the future). 
Many ※paranormal§ experiences can
probably be explained by mental distur-
bances; others are probably due to
coincidence, self-deception, or fraud.
paraquat A poisonous weedkiller that is
available in high concentrations for agri-
cultural use and which can be fatal if
swallowed, inhaled, or absorbed through
the skin. Paraquat poisoning requires
urgent medical attention. The symptoms
may include breathing difficulties, mouth
ulcers, nosebleeds, diarrhoea, and later,
respiratory and kidney failure. Treat-
ments include eating activated charcoal
or Fuller＊s earth.  Haemodialysis may
also be used.
parasite Any organism living in or on
another living creature and deriving
advantage from it, while causing the
host disadvantage. The parasite obtains
food from the host＊s blood, tissues, or
diet. Parasites may spend only part of
their life-cycles with the host or remain
there permanently. Some parasites cause
few symptoms, while others cause dis-
ease or even death.
Animal parasites of humans include
protozoa,  worms,  flukes, leeches,  lice,
ticks, and  mites.  Viruses and disease-
causing  fungi and  bacteria are also
essentially parasites. 
parasitology The scientific study of
parasites. Although viruses and many
types of bacteria and fungi are para-
sites, their study is conducted under the
title of microbiology.
parasuicide See suicide, attempted.
parasympathetic nervous system
One of the 2 divisions of the autonomic
nervous system. 
parathion A highly poisonous agricul-
tural organophosphate insecticide. 
parathyroid glands Two pairs of oval,
pea-sized glands that lie behind the
thyroid gland in the neck. Some people
have only 1 parathyroid gland or have
extra glands in the neck or chest. The
glands produce parathyroid  hormone,
which helps regulate the level of calci-
um in the blood; even small variations
in calcium level can impair muscle and
nerve function. Rarely, the parathyroid
PARAPARESIS PARATHYROID GLANDS
P435
glands may become overactive (in a
condition called  hyperparathyroidism)
or underactive (see hypoparathyroidism). 
parathyroid tumour A growth within
a  parathyroid gland. The tumour may
cause excess secretion of parathyroid
hormone, leading to  hyperparathyroid-
ism. Cancers of the parathyroid are very
rare; most parathyroid tumours are non-
cancerous  adenomas. An adenoma that
causes hyperparathyroidism will be sur-
gically removed (see parathyroidectomy).
This usually provides a complete cure. 
paratyphoid fever An illness identical
in most respects to typhoid fever, except
that it is caused by  SALMONELLA PARA-
TYPHI and is usually less severe.
paraumbilical hernia A hernia occur-
ring near the navel. It may occur in obese
women who have had several children.
parenchyma The functional (as opposed
to supporting) tissue of an organ.
parenteral A term applied to the admin-
istration of drugs or other substances
by any route other than via the gastro-
intestinal tract (for example, by injection
into a blood vessel).
parenteral nutrition Intravenous feed-
ing (see feeding, artificial).
paresis Partial paralysis or weakness of
1 or more muscles. 
parietal A medical term that refers to
the wall of a part of the body. 
parity  A term that is used to indicate
the number of pregnancies a woman
has undergone that have resulted in the
birth of a baby capable of survival.
parkinsonism Any neurological disor-
der characterized by a mask-like face,
rigidity, and slow movements. The most
common type is Parkinson＊s disease. 
Parkinson＊s disease A neurological
disorder that causes muscle tremor, stiff-
ness, and weakness. The characteristic
signs are trembling, rigid posture, slow
movements, and a shuffling, unbalanced
walk. The disease is caused by degener-
ation of, or damage to, cells in the basal
ganglia of the brain, reducing the amount
of dopamine (which is needed for control
of movement). It occurs mainly in elder-
ly people and is more common in men.
The disease usually begins as a slight
tremor of 1 hand, arm, or leg, which is
worse when the hand or limb is at rest.
Later, both sides of the body are affected,
causing a stiff, shuffling, walk; constant
trembling of the hands, sometimes
accompanied by shaking of the head; a
permanent rigid stoop; and an unblink-
ing, fixed expression. The intellect is
unaffected until late in the disease.
There is no cure. Drug treatment is used
to minimize symptoms in later stages.
Levodopa, which the body converts into
dopamine, is usually the most effective
drug. It may be used in combination with
benserazide or carbidopa. The effects of
levodopa gradually wear off. Drugs that
may be used in conjunction with it, or
as substitutes for it, include amantadine
and  bromocriptine. Surgical operations
on the brain are occasionally performed.
Untreated, the disease progresses over
10 to 15 years, leading to  severe weak-
ness and incapacity. About one third of
sufferers eventually develop dementia.
paronychia An infection of the skin fold
at the base or side of the nail. Parony-
chia may be acute (caused by bacteria)
or chronic (usually caused by  CANDIDA
ALBICANS). The condition is most com-
mon in women, particularly those with
poor circulation and whose work involves
frequent contact with water. It also
affects people with skin disease involv-
ing the nail fold. Treatment is with
antifungal drugs or antibiotic drugs.
parotid glands The largest of the 3 pairs
of salivary glands. The parotid glands lie
PAROTID GLANDS PARATHYROID TUMOUR
P
LOCATION
Trachea
PARATHYROID GLANDS
Thyroid
cartilage
Thyroid
gland
Parathyroid
glands436
above the angle of the jaw, below and in
front of the ear, on each side of the face.  
parotitis Inflammation of the  parotid
glands, often due to infection with the
mumps virus. 
paroxetine A selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor antidepressant drug. Possible
side effects include nausea, indigestion,
and appetite loss.
paroxysm A sudden attack, worsening,
or recurrence of symptoms or of a dis-
ease; a spasm or seizure.
parrot fever The common name for
psittacosis.
parturition See childbirth.
parvovirus A viral infection that causes
a rash and joint inflammation. Many
children have no symptoms, but some
have a bright red rash on the cheeks, a
mild fever, and sometimes mild joint
inflammation. Symptoms are more sev-
ere in adults; they include a rash on the
palms and soles of the feet and severe
inflammation in the knee, wrist, and hand
joints. A diagnosis is made from the
symptoms and a  blood test. The infec-
tion usually clears up within 2 weeks
without treatment.
passive smoking Involuntary inhala-
tion of tobacco smoke by people who do
not smoke. Passive smoking has been
shown to increase the risks of chest and
ear infections in children and of tobacco-
induced cancers in adults. 
pasteurization The process of heating
foods to destroy disease-causing micro-
organisms, and to reduce the numbers
of microorganisms responsible for fer-
mentation and putrefaction. 
patch test A method of diagnosing the
substances responsible for contact der-
matitis. A selection of possible allergens
are put on a patch and taped to the
skin. A skin reaction indicates sensiti-
vity to a particular allergen.
patella The kneecap (see knee).
patent A term meaning open or unob-
structed (such as in  patent ductus
arteriosus). The term patent medicine is
sometimes used to refer to proprietary
drugs protected by a patent.
patent ductus arteriosus A defect of
the heart in which the ductus arteriosus
(a channel between the pulmonary artery
and the aorta in the fetus) fails to close
at birth. It affects about 60 babies per
100,000. In the fetus, blood pumped by
the right side of the heart flows through
the ductus arteriosus and bypasses the
lungs (see fetal circulation). At or shortly
after birth, the ductus usually closes. In
some babies this closure may fail to
happen, preventing normal circulation.
There are usually no symptoms unless a
large amount of blood is misdirected, in
which case the baby fails to gain weight,
becomes short of breath on exertion,
and may have frequent chest infections.
Eventually, heart failure may develop.
Diagnosis is made from hearing a
heart  murmur, from  chest X-rays, and
from an  ECG and  echocardiography.
The drug indometacin or surgery may
be used to close the duct. 
paternity testing The use of blood
tests to help decide whether a man is
the father of a child. Blood samples are
taken from the child, from the suspected
father, and sometimes from the mother.
The samples are tested for blood groups,
histocompatibility antigens, and simi-
larities in  DNA. Genetic fingerprinting
provides the most decisive result. 
patho- A prefix denoting a relationship
to disease.
pathogen Any agent, but particularly a
microorganism, that causes disease.
pathogenesis The processes by which
a disorder originates and develops. 
pathognomonic A medical term applied
to a symptom or sign that is character-
istic of a disease or disorder and is
therefore sufficient to make a diagnosis. 
pathological Relating to disease or to
its study (pathology).
pathology The study of disease 每 its
causes, mechanisms, and effects on the
body. Pathologists conduct autopsies to
determine causes of death and to deter-
mine the effects that a disease or a
treatment has had.
pathology, cellular Also called cytopath-
ology, the branch of cytology concerned
with the effects of disease on cells.
pathology, chemical Another name
for  clinical  biochemistry, the study of
abnormalities in the chemistry of body
tissues in disease.
pathophysiology The study of the ef-
fects of disease on body functions.
PAROTITIS PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
P437
-pathy A suffix that denotes a disease
or disorder.
PCR An abbreviation for polymerase
chain reaction.
peak-flow meter A piece of equipment
that measures the maximum speed at
which air can flow out of the lungs. A
peak-flow meter is useful in assessing
the severity of  bronchospasm, and is
most commonly used to diagnose asth-
ma, monitor patients with asthma, and
assess response to asthma treatment.
The peak flow is measured by taking a
deep breath and breathing out with max-
imum effort through the mouthpiece.
peau d＊orange A condition in which
the skin has a normal colour but looks
like orange peel. The skin＊s dimpled
appearance is due to fluid retention in
the nearby lymph vessels.
pectoral A medical term that means
relating to the chest, as in the major
and minor pectoral muscles. 
pediculosis Any type of louse infesta-
tion. (See lice; pubic lice.)
peer review Processes by which doc-
tors and scientists review the work of
colleagues in the same field. Peer review
is used to maintain standards. 
pellagra A potentially fatal nutritional
disorder caused by deficiency of niacin
(see vitamin B complex) and resulting in
dermatitis, diarrhoea, and dementia. Pel-
lagra  occurs primarily in poor rural
communities in parts of the world, such
as areas of India, where people subsist
on maize. Most of the niacin in maize is
unabsorbable unless the maize is treat-
ed with an alkali such as limewater.
Disorders such as  carcinoid syndrome
and  inflammatory bowel disease may
also be a cause of pellagra.
The 1st symptoms are weakness, weight
loss, lethargy, depression, irritability,
and inflammation and itching of skin
exposed to sunlight. In acute attacks,
weeping blisters may develop on the
affected skin, and the tongue becomes
swollen and painful. Diagnosis is made
from the patient＊s condition and dietary
history. Daily intake of niacin and a var-
ied diet usually bring about a cure.
pelvic examination Examination of a
woman＊s external and internal genitalia.
After examination of the external geni-
talia, a  speculum is inserted into the
vagina to allow a clear view of the cervix.
A cervical smear test may be performed.
The doctor inserts 2 fingers into the vagi-
na and, with  the other hand,feels the
abdomen to evaluate the position and
size of the uterus and the ovaries and to
detect any tenderness or swelling.
pelvic floor exercises A programme of
exercises to strengthen the muscles and
tighten the ligaments at the base of the
abdomen, which form the pelvic floor. 
These muscles and ligaments support
the uterus, vagina, bladder, urethra, and
rectum. Performing the exercises may
help to prevent prolapse of the uterus
(see  uterus, prolapse of) and urinary
stress incontinence (see  incontinence,
urinary). They may also help women who
find achieving orgasm difficult.
The pelvic floor muscles are those that
tighten when urine flow is stopped mid-
stream. The exercises involve stopping
and starting urine flow several times by
contracting and relaxing the muscles.
Ideally, they should be performed for 5
minutes every hour throughout the day.
They can be done standing, sitting, or
lying down, by imagining that urine is
being passed, contracting and holding
the muscles for 10 seconds, and then
slowly releasing them, repeating 5每10
times as often as possible.
pelvic infection An infection in the
female reproductive system. Severe or
PELVIC INFECTION -PATHY
P
PEAK-FLOW METER
Peak-flow
meter
Pressure
gauge
Mouthpiecefront. Each hip bone consists of 3 fused
bones: the ilium (the largest and upper-
most), ischium (which bears muchof
the body weight when sitting), and
pubis (the smallest).
In women, the pelvis is generally shal-
low and broad, and the pubic symphysis
joint is less rigid than a man＊s. These
differences facilitate childbirth. In men,
the greater body weight needs a larger
and more heavily built pelvis.
pemphigoid An uncommon chronic skin
disease, mainly affecting elderly people,
in which large, sometimes itchy, blisters
form on the skin. Pemphigoid is thought
to be an autoimmune disorder. Diagnosis
is made with a skin biopsy, and treatment
is usually a long-term course of cortico-
steroid or immunosuppressant drugs.
pemphigus A rare, serious skin disease
in which  blisters develop on the skin
and in the mouth. Pemphigus primarily
affects people aged 40每60. The blisters
usually develop in the mouth, before
appearing on the skin and then ruptur-
ing to form raw areas that may become
infected and later crust over. Skin that
appears unaffected may also blister
after gentle pressure is applied. If a
large area of the body is affected, severe
skin loss can lead to bacterial infection
and, sometimes, death.
The diagnosis is confirmed by a skin
biopsy. Treatment is with a long-term
course of corticosteroid drugs and, some-
times, immunosuppressants.  Antibiotics
may also be prescribed.
penicillamine An  antirheumatic drug
sometimes used to treat  rheumatoid
recurrent pelvic infection is referred to
as pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). 
pelvic inflammatory disease An infec-
tion of the internal female reproductive
organs. Pelvic inflammatory disease (or
PID) may not have any obvious cause,
but may occur as a result of a sexually
transmitted infection, such as  gonor-
rhoea, or after a miscarriage, an abortion,
or  childbirth. An  IUD increases the risk
of infection. PID may cause  infertility or
increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy.
Common symptoms include abdominal
pain and tenderness, fever, and irregu-
lar menstrual periods. Pain often occurs
after menstruation and may be worse
during intercourse. There may also be
malaise, vomiting, or backache. A diag-
nosis is usually made by an internal
pelvic examination, examination of swabs
to look for infection, and a laparoscopy.
Antibiotic drugs and sometimes  anal-
gesic drugs are prescribed. An IUD may
need to be removed. 
pelvic pain See abdominal pain.
pelvimetry Assessment of the shape
and dimensions of a woman＊s pelvis by
making measurements on an  X-ray
image. Pelvimetry may be carried out to
determine whether a woman is likely 
to have difficulty in delivering a baby
vaginally. The procedure may also be
performed after a vaginal delivery has
been unsuccessful, to assist in planning
a future pregnancy.
pelvis The ring of bones in the lower
trunk consisting of 2 innominate (hip)
bones, which are joined to the sacrum at
the back and the pubic symphysis at the
PELVIS
Pubic
symphysis
Sacrum
Pubis
Ischium
MALE PELVIS FEMALE PELVIS
Ilium
Pelvic
inlet
Wider, more
circular
pelvic inlet
Coccyx
438
PELVIC INFLAMMATORY DISEASEPENICILLAMINE
P439
arthritis. Penicillamine is also used to
treat copper, mercury, lead, or arsenic
poisoning; Wilson＊s disease; and primary
biliary cirrhosis.
The possible adverse effects of peni-
cillamine can include allergic rashes,
itching, nausea, vomiting, abdominal
pain, loss of taste, blood disorders, and
impaired kidney function.
penicillin drugs A group of  antibiotic
drugs. Natural penicillins are derived
from the mould  PENICILLIUM; others are
synthetic preparations. Penicillins are
used to treat many infective conditions,
including  tonsillitis, bronchitis, bacterial
endocarditis,  syphilis, and  pneumonia.
They are also given to prevent rheumatic
fever from recurring. Common adverse
effectsof penicillins are an allergic reac-
tion causing a rash, and diarrhoea. 
penile implant A  prosthesis inserted
into the  penis to help a man suffering
from permanent  impotence to achieve
intercourse. The various types include a
silicone splint inserted in the tissues of
the upper surface of the penis, and an
inflatable prosthesis that is inflated by
squeezing a small bulb in the scrotum.
penile warts See warts, genital.
penis The male sex organ through which
urine and semen pass. The penis consists
mainly of 3 cylindrical bodies of erectile
tissue (spongy tissue full of blood ves-
sels) that run  along its length. Two of
these bodies, the corpora cavernosa, lie
side by side along the upper part of the
penis. The 3rd body, the corpus spon-
giosum,  lies centrally beneath them and
expands at  the end to form the  glans.
Through the centre of the corpusspon-
giosum runs the urethra, a narrow tube
that carries urine and semen out of the
body through an opening at the tip of
the glans. Around the erectile tissue is a
sheath consisting of fibrous connective
tissue enclosed by skin. Over the glans,
the skin forms a fold called the foreskin.
penis, cancer of A rare type of cancer-
ous tumour that is more common in
uncircumcised men with poor personal
hygiene. Viral infection and smoking
have both been shown to be additional
risk factors.  The tumour usually starts
onthe  glans or on the foreskin as a
painless,  wart-like lump or a painful
ulcer, and develops into a cauliflower-
like mass. The growth usually spreads
slowly, but in some cases it can spread
to the lymph nodes in the groin within a
few months.
Diagnosis is made by a biopsy. If the
tumour is detected early, radiotherapy is
usually successful. Otherwise, removal of
part or all of the penis may be necessary.
pentamidine An antiprotozoal drug (see
protozoa), administered by intravenous
infusion or nebulizer to prevent and
treat  pneumocystis pneumonia in immu-
nosuppressed people. Pentamidine is
also  used to treat the tropical disease
leishmaniasis. Side effects may include
nausea and vomiting, dizziness, flush-
ing, rash, and taste disturbances.
pentazocine An opioid  analgesic drug
used to relieve moderate or severe pain
caused by injury, surgery, cancer, or
childbirth. It is rarely used because of
its adverse affects, which include dizzi-
ness, drowsiness, nausea, vomiting, and,
rarely, hallucinations. Drug dependence
may develop if high doses are taken for
prolonged periods.
peppermint oil An oil obtained from
the peppermint plant MENTHA PIPERITA. It
is prescribed to  relieve abdominal colic
but may cause heartburn. Peppermint
oil is also used as a flavouring in some
drug preparations.
peptic ulcer A raw area that develops
in the gastrointestinal tract as a result
of erosion by acidic gastric juice; it
most  commonly occurs in the stomach
or the 1st part of the duodenum.
Themajor cause of peptic ulcers is
HELICOBACTER PYLORI bacterial infection,
which can damage the lining of the stom-
achand duodenum, allowing the acid
stomach contents to attack it. Analgesic
drugs, alcohol, excess acid production,
and smoking can also damage the
stomach lining. Ulcers can also form in
the oesophagus, when acidic juice from
the stomach enters it (see  acid reflux),
and in the duodenum.
There may be no symptoms, or there
may be burning or gnawing pain in the
upper abdomen. Other possible symp-
toms include loss of appetite, nausea,
and vomiting. The ulcer may also bleed.
If severe, it may result in haematemesis
PEPTIC ULCER PENICILLIN DRUGS
P(vomiting of blood) and melaena, and is
a medical emergency. Chronic bleeding
may cause iron-deficiency anaemia. Rare-
ly,an ulcer may perforate the wall of the
digestive tract and lead to peritonitis.
An ulcer is usually diagnosed by an
endoscopy of the stomach and duode-
num; less commonly, a barium meal (see
barium X-ray examination) is performed.
Tests will be carried out to see whether
the individual is infected with the HELI-
COBACTER bacterium.If this is the case,
a combination of antibiotics and an ulcer-
healing drug will be given. A further test
may be done to check that treatment
has been successful. If HELICOBACTER is
not detected 每 for example, in ulcers
caused by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) 每 treatment is with pro-
ton pump  inhibitors or H2-blockers, and
the NSAIDs willbe stopped.Surgery is
now rarely needed  for peptic ulcers,
except to treat complications such as
bleeding or perforation. 
peptide A protein fragment consisting
of 2 or more amino acids. Peptides that
consist of many linked amino acids are
known as polypeptides; chains of poly-
peptides are called  proteins. In the
body, peptides occur in forms such as
hormones and endorphins.
perception The interpretation of a sen-
sation. Information is received through
the 5 senses (taste, smell, hearing, vis-
ion, and touch) and organized into a
pattern by the brain. Factors such as
attitude, mood, and expectations affect
the final interpretation.  Hallucinations
are false perceptions that occur in the
absence of sensory stimuli. 
percussion A diagnostic technique in-
volving tapping the chest or abdomen
with the fingers and listening to the
sound produced to deduce the condi-
tion of the internal organs.(See also
examination, physical.) 
percutaneous A medical term meaning
through the skin. 
perforation A hole made in an organ
or tissue by disease or injury. 
peri- A prefix meaning around.
perianal haematoma A  haematoma
under the skin around the anus.
pericarditis Inflammation of the  peri-
cardium, which often leads to chest pain
and fever. There may also be an increased
amount of fluid (effusion) in the pericar-
dial space, which may restrict the heart.
Long-term inflammation can cause con-
strictive pericarditis, a condition in which
the pericardium becomes scarred, thick-
ens, and contracts, interfering with the
heart＊s action. 
Causes of pericarditis include infection;
myocardial infarction; cancer spreading
from another site; and injury to the
pericardium. The disorder may accom-
pany rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, and kidney failure. 
Pericarditis causes pain behind the
breastbone, and sometimes in the neck
and shoulders. There may also be fever.
Constrictive pericarditis causes oedema
of the legs and abdomen.
Diagnosis is made from a physicalex-
amination and an ECG and chest X-rays
or  echocardiography. If possible, treat-
ment is aimed at the cause. Analgesic
drugs or  anti-inflammatory drugs may
be given. If an effusion is present, fluid
may be drawn off through a needle. In
constrictive pericarditis, part of the peri-
cardium may be removed.
pericardium The membranous bag that
surrounds the heart and the roots of the
major blood vessels that emerge from
it. The pericardium has 2 layers separat-
ed by a space called the pericardial
space, which contains a small  amount
of fluid that lubricates the heart.
PEPTIDE PERICARDIUM
P
PERICARDIUM
Myocardium
(heart muscle)
Outer layer of
pericardium
DETAIL
Inner layer of pericardium
Pericardial fluid
STRUCTURE OF HEART
440teeth can be anchored to firmer teeth
by splinting (see splinting, dental).
period pain See dysmenorrhoea.
periosteum The tissue that coats all of
the  bones in the body except the joint
surfaces. The periosteum contains small
blood vessels and nerves, and produces
new bone in the initial stages of healing
following a fracture.
periostitis Inflammation of the  perios-
teum. The usual cause is a blow that
presses directly on to bone. Symptoms
include pain, tenderness, and swelling
over the affected area. 
peripheral nervous system All the
nerves that fan out from the central ner-
vous system to the muscles, skin,
internal organs, and glands (see nerve;
cranial nerves; spinal nerves). 
peripheral vascular disease Narrow-
ing of blood vessels in the legs, and
sometimes in the arms, restricting
blood flow and causing pain. In severe
cases,  gangrene may develop. In most
affected people, peripheral vascular dis-
ease is caused by  atherosclerosis. The
greatest risk factor is smoking. Diseases
of the peripheral vessels that are not
caused by atherosclerosis include Buer-
ger＊s disease,  Raynaud＊s disease,  deep
vein thrombosis, and varicose veins.
The first symptom of narrowed arter-
ies due to atherosclerosis is usually an
aching feeling in the leg muscles when
walking, which is relieved by resting.
Pain recurs after the same amount of
441
perimetry A visual field test to deter-
mine the extent of peripheral vision.
(See eye, examination of.)
perinatal Relating to the period just
before or just after birth. The perinatal
period is often defined as the period
from the 28th week of pregnancy to the
end of the 1st week after birth.
perinatology A branch of obstetrics and
paediatrics concerned with the study and
care of the mother and baby during preg-
nancy and just after birth.
perineum The area bounded internally
by the pelvic floor (the muscles that  sup-
port the pelvis) and the surrounding
bony structures. Externally, the perineum
is the area that lies behind the genitals
and in front of the anus. 
periodic fever An inherited condition
causing recurrent bouts of fever. (See
familial Mediterranean fever.)
period, menstrual See menstruation.
periodontal disease Any disorder of
the periodontium (the tissues that sur-
round and support the teeth). 
periodontics The branch of  dentistry
concerned with periodontal disease.
periodontitis Inflammation of the peri-
odontium (the tissues surrounding the
teeth). There are 2 types: periapical and
chronic. Periapical periodontitis results
from neglected dental  caries  and occurs
when bacteria enter the tooth pulp and
spread to the root tip, sometimes caus-
ing a dental abscess, granuloma, or cyst.
Chronic periodontitis is a result of un-
treated gingivitis, in which bacteria attack
the periodontal tissues. This type is the
major cause of adult tooth loss.
Periapical periodontitis may cause
toothache, especially on biting. An ab-
scess may make the tooth loose; a large
dental cyst may cause swelling of the
jaw. In chronic periodontitis, the signs
of gingivitis are present.
Periodontitis is diagnosed by a dental
examination and dental X-rays. Periapi-
cal periodontis is treated by draining pus
and filling the tooth or by extraction.
Regular teeth cleaning can prevent
advanced chronic periodontal disease
and further destruction of the tissues.
Treatment may include root planing,
scaling, gingivectomy, or curettage (see
curettage, dental). Sometimes, loose
PERIPHERAL VASCULAR DISEASE PERIMETRY
P
PERIOSTEUM
Periosteum
Blood
vessel
Nerve Spongy
bone
Compact
bone
STRUCTURE OF BONE442
walking as before. Prolonged use of the
arms may also cause pain. Symptoms
then become worse until, eventually,
pain is present even when the person is
at rest and the affected limb is cold and
numb. In the final stage, there is gan-
grene. Sudden arterial blockage may
occur, causing sudden severe pain. Move-
ment and feeling in the limb are lost.
A diagnosis is often based on  results
of doppler ultrasound or angiography. 
Exercise and giving up smoking are
important aspects of treatment. Arterial
reconstructive surgery,  bypass  surgery,
or balloon  angioplasty may be needed.
Amputation is needed for gangrene.
peristalsis Wave-like movement caused
by rhythmic contraction and relaxation
of the smooth muscles in the walls of
the digestive tract and the ureters. Peri-
stalsis is responsible for the movement
of food and waste products through the
digestive system and for transporting
urine from the kidneys to the bladder. 
peritonealdialysis See dialysis.
peritoneum The 2-layered membrane
that lines the abdominal cavity and cov-
ers and supports the abdominal organs.
The peritoneumproduces a lubricating
fluid that allows the abdominal organs to
glide smoothly over each other, and pro-
tects the organs against infection. It also
absorbs fluid and acts as a natural fil-
tering system. The peritoneum may
become inflamed as a complication of
an abdominal disorder (see peritonitis).
peritonitis Inflammation of the  peri-
toneum. Peritonitis is a serious, usually
acute, condition. The most common
cause is  perforation of the stomach or
intestine wall, which allows bacteria and
digestive juices to move into the abdom-
inal cavity. Perforation is usually the
result of a  peptic ulcer,  appendicitis, or
diverticulitis.Peritonitis may also be
associated with acute  salpingitis,  chole-
cystitis, or septicaemia. 
There is usually severe abdominal
pain. After a few hours, the abdomen
feels hard, and  peristalsis stops (see
ileus, paralytic). Other symptoms are
fever, bloating, nausea, and vomiting. 
Diagnosis is made from a  physical
examination. Surgery may be necessary
to deal with the cause. If the cause is
unknown,a  laparoscopy or an explor-
atory  laparotomy may be performed.
Antibiotic drugs and  intravenous infu-
sions  of fluid are often given. In most
cases, a full recovery is made. Intestinal
obstruction, caused by  adhesions, may
occur at a later stage.
peritonsillar abscess A complication
of tonsillitis.
permanent teeth The 2nd teeth, which
usually start to replace the primary teeth
at about the age of 6. There are 32 per-
manent teeth: 16 in each jaw. Each set of
16 consists of 4 incisors, 2 canines, 4
premolars and 6 molars. (See also erup-
tion of teeth.)
permethrin A drug included in prepa-
rations used to treat lice and scabies.
pernicious anaemia A type of  anae-
mia caused by a failure to absorb vitamin
B12.Deficiency leads to the production
of abnormal, large red blood cells. 
pernio An alternative term for chilblain.
peroneal muscular atrophy A rare,
inherited disorder characterized by
muscle wasting in the feet and calves
and then in the hands and forearms. The
condition, also known as Charcot每Marie每
Tooth disease, is caused by degeneration
of some peripheral nerves. It is more
common in boys, and usually appears
in late childhood or adolescence. Mus-
cle wasting stops halfway up the arms
and legs, making them look like invert-
ed bottles; sensation may be lost. There
is no treatment, but the sufferer rarely
PERISTALSISPERONEAL MUSCULAR ATROPHY
P
PERITONEUM
Peritoneum
Small
intestine
Pancreas
Large
intestine
Stomach443
becomes totally incapacitated because
the disease usually progresses very
slowly. Life expectancy is normal.
perphenazine A phenothiazine-type anti-
psychotic drug used to relieve symptoms
in psychiatric disorders, such as schizo-
phrenia; to sedate agitated or anxious
patients; and sometimes to relieve sev-
ere nausea and vomiting. 
Possible adverse effects include abnor-
mal movements of the face and limbs,
drowsiness, blurred vision, stuffy nose,
and headache. Long-term use of the drug
may cause parkinsonism.
persistent vegetative state Long-term
unconsciousness caused by damage to
areas of the brain that control higher
mental functions. The eyes may open
and close, and there may be random
movements of the limbs, but there is 
no response to stimuli such as pain.
Basic functions such as breathing and
heartbeat are not affected. There is no
treatment to reverse the situation, but,
with good nursing care, survival for
months or years is possible.
personality The sum of a person＊s traits,
habits, and experiences. Temperament,
intelligence, emotion, and motivation are
important aspects. The development of
personality seems to depend on the
interaction of heredity and environment.
personality disorders A group of con-
ditions characterized by a failure to
learn from experience or to adapt appro-
priatelyto changes, resulting in distress
and impairment of social functioning.
Personality disorders are ways of behav-
ing that may become especially obvious
during periods of stress. They are usual-
ly first recognizable in adolescence and
continue throughout life, often leading
to depression or anxiety.
Specific types of personality disorders
are divided into 3 groups but there is
often overlap. The 1st group is charac-
terized by eccentric behaviour. Paranoid
people show suspiciousness and mis-
trust of others, schizoid people are cold
emotionally, and schizotypal persona-
lities have behaviour oddities similar to
those of schizophrenia, but less severe. 
In the 2nd group, behaviour tends to be
dramatic. Histrionic people are excit-
able and constantly crave stimulation,
narcissists have an exaggerated sense
of their own importance (see narcissism),
and people with antisocial personality
disorder fail to conform to accepted
social standards of behaviour.  
People in the 3rd group show anxiety
and fear. Dependent personalities lack
the self-confidence to function inde-
pendently (see dependence). Those with
compulsive personalities are rigid in
their habits (see  obsessive每compulsive
disorder), and passive-aggressive peo-
ple resist demands from others. 
Treatment is usually  counselling,  psy-
chotherapy, and behaviour therapy.
personality tests Questionnaires de-
signed to define various personality
traits or types. Tests may be designed to
detect psychiatric symptoms, underly-
ing personality traits, how outgoing or
reserved a person is, and predisposition
to developing neurotic illness. 
perspiration The production and ex-
cretion of sweat from the sweat glands.
Perspiration is another name for sweat. 
Perthes＊ disease Inflammation of an
epiphysis of the head of the  femur. 
The disease is a type of osteochondritis
juvenilis, thought to be due to disrupted
blood supply to the bone. The condition
is most common in boys aged 5每10, and
usually affects 1 hip. Symptoms include
pain in the thigh and groin, and a limp
on the affected side. Diagnosis is made
with X-rays. Treatment may be rest for a
few weeks, followed by splinting of the
hip, or surgery. The disease usually clears
up by itself within 3 years, but the hip
may be permanently deformed. 
pertussis A highly contagious infectious
disease, also called whooping cough,
which mainly affects infants and young
children. The main features of the ill-
ness are bouts of coughing, often ending
in a characteristic ※whoop§. The main
cause is infection with  BORDETELLA PER-
TUSSIS bacteria, which are spread in
airborne droplets. 
After an incubation period of 7每10 days,
the illness starts with a mild cough,
sneezing, nasal discharge, fever, and
sore eyes. After a few days, the cough
becomes more persistent and severe,
especially at night. Whooping occurs in
most cases. Sometimes the cough can
PERTUSSIS PERPHENAZINE
P444
cause vomiting. In infants, there is a
risk of temporary  apnoea following a
coughing spasm. The illness may last
for a few weeks. The possible complica-
tions include nosebleeds,  dehydration,
pneumonia, pneumothorax, bronchiecta-
sis (permanent widening of the airways),
and convulsions. Untreated, pertussis
may prove fatal.
Pertussis is usually diagnosed from the
symptoms. In the early stages,  erythro-
mycin is often given to reduce the child＊s
infectivity. Treatment consists of keep-
ing the child warm, giving small, frequent
meals and plenty to drink, and protect-
ing him or her from stimuli, such as
smoke, that can provoke coughing. If
the child becomes blue or persistently
vomits after coughing, hospital admis-
sion is needed.
In developed countries, most infants
are vaccinated against pertussis in the
1st year of life. It is usually given as part
of the  DPT vaccination at 2, 3, and 4
months of age. Possible complications
include a mild fever and fretfulness.
Very rarely, an infant may have a severe
reaction, with high-pitched screaming
or seizures. 
perversion See deviation, sexual.
pes cavus See claw-foot.
pessary Any of a variety of devices placed
in the vagina. Some types are used to
correct the position of the uterus (see
uterus, prolapse of); others are used as
contraceptive devices. The term pessary
is also used to refer to a medicated
vaginal suppository.
pesticides Poisonous chemicals used to
eradicate pests. Different types include
herbicides, insecticides, and fungicides.
Pesticide poisoning, particularly in chil-
dren, may result from swallowing an
insecticide or a garden herbicide (see
chlorate poisoning). Poisoning may also
occur in agricultural workers, often as a
result of inhalation or absorption of the
chemical through the skin. Exposure to
pesticides can also occur indirectly,
through eating food in which chemicals
have accumulated as a result of crop
spraying. (See also  DDT;  defoliant poi-
soning; lindane; paraquat; parathion.)
petechiae Red or purple, flat, pinhead
spots that occur in the skin or mucous
membranes. Petechiae are caused by 
a localized  haemorrhage from small
blood vessels. They occur in  purpura
and, sometimes, bacterial endocarditis.
pethidine A synthetic opioid  analgesic
drug similar to, but less powerful than,
morphine. Pethidine is used as a  pre-
medication and to relieve severe pain
after operations, during childbirth, or in
terminal illness. As it may cause nausea
and vomiting, it is usually given with an
antiemetic drug.
petit mal A type of seizure that occurs
in  epilepsy. Petit mal attacks occur in
children and adolescents but rarely per-
sist into adulthood. There is momentary
loss of awareness, occasionally with
drooping eyelids. Treatment is with an
anticonvulsant drug. 
petroleum jelly A greasy substance
obtained from petroleum, also known
as petrolatum or soft paraffin. The jelly
is commonly used as an ointment base,
a protective dressing, and an emollient. 
PET scanning The abbreviation for
positron emission tomography, a diag-
nostic technique based on the detection
of positrons (a type of subatomic parti-
cle) that are emitted by radioactively
labelled substances introduced into the
body. PET scanning produces 3-dimen-
sional images of the metabolic and
chemical activity of tissues.
Substances used in biochemical pro-
cesses in the body are labelled with
radioisotopes and then injected into the
PERVERSION PET SCANNING
P
PETSCANNING
Area of low 
brain activity
Area of high
brain activity
PET SCAN OF NORMAL BRAIN445
bloodstream. The substances are taken
up in greater concentrations by tissues
that are more metabolically active. The
substances emit positrons, which release
photons that are detected by the scan-
ner. PET scans are used to detect brain
tumours, locate epileptic activity within
the brain, and examine brain function.
Peutz每Jeghers syndrome A very rare,
inherited condition in which polyps occur
in the gastrointestinal tract and small,
flat, brown spots appear on the lips and
in the mouth. Occasionally the polyps
bleed, or cause abdominal pain or intus-
susception. Tests include  barium X-ray
examination and  endoscopy. Bleeding
polyps may be removed.
peyote A cactus plant found in northern
Mexico and the southwest of the US. Its
dried blossoms are used to prepare the
hallucinogenic drug mescaline.
Peyronie＊s disease A disorder of the
penis in which part of the sheath of
fibrous connective tissue thickens, caus-
ing  the penis to bend during erection.
This commonly makes intercourse diffi-
cult and painful. Eventually, some of the
penile erectile tissue may also thicken.
Men over 40 are most often affected.
The cause is unknown. The disease may
improve without treatment. Otherwise,
local injections of  corticosteroid drugs
or surgical removal of the thickened area
and replacement with normal tissue may
be carried out.
pH A measure of the acidity or alkalinity
of a solution. The pH scale ranges from
0每14, 7 being neutral; values smaller than
this are acid, values larger are alkaline.
The pH of body fluids must be close to
7.4 for metabolic reactions to proceed
normally (see acid每base balance).
phaeochromocytoma A rare tumour of
cells that secrete  epinephrene  (adrena-
line) and norepinephrine (noradrenaline).
The tumour causes increased produc-
tion of these hormones, leading to
hypertension. The tumours usually devel-
op in the medulla (core) of the  adrenal
glands, and are most common in young
to middle-aged adults.
Hypertension is the only sign most of
the time, but pressure on the tumour,
emotional upset, change in posture, or
taking  beta-blocker drugs  can cause a
surge of hormones. This surge brings on
a sudden rise in blood pressure, palpita-
tions, headache, nausea, vomiting, facial
flushing, sweating, and, sometimes, a
feeling of impending death.
Blood tests and  urinalysis are used to
make a diagnosis.  CT scanning,  MRI,
and  radioisotope scanning may be used
to locate the tumours, which are then
usually removed surgically. Follow-up
medical checks are required because
the condition occasionally recurs.
phagocyte A cell in the immune system
that can surround, engulf, and digest
microorganisms, foreign particles, and
cellular debris. Phagocytes are found in
the blood,  spleen,  lymph nodes, and
alveoli (small air sacs) within the lungs. 
phalanges The small bones that make
up the fingers, thumb, and toes. The
thumb and big toe have 2 phalanges; all
the other fingers and toes have 3.
phalanx A term for any of the bones in
the fingers or the toes.
phallus Any object that may symbolize
the penis. 
phantom limb The  perception that a
limb is still present after amputation. 
pharmaceutical Any medicinal drug.
The term is also used in relation to the
manufacture and sale of drugs.
pharmacognosy The study or knowl-
edge of the pharmacologically active
ingredients of plants.
pharmacokinetics The term used to
describe how the body deals with a drug.
pharmacology The branch of science
that is concerned with the discovery and
development of  drugs; their chemical
composition; their actions; their uses;
and their side effects and toxicity.
pharmacopoeia Any book that lists
and describes most medicinal drugs,
especially an official publication, such
as the British Pharmacopoeia (BP).
Apharmacopoeia describes sources,
preparations, and doses of drugs. There
may also be information on how drugs
work and on possible adverse effects.
pharmacy The practice of preparing
drugs, and making up and dispensing
prescriptions. Also, a place where these
activities are carried out.
pharyngeal diverticulum An alterna-
tive term for a pharyngeal pouch. 
PHARYNGEAL DIVERTICULUM PEUTZ每JEGHERS SYNDROME
P446
pharyngeal pouch See oesophageal di-
verticulum.
pharyngitis Acute or chronic inflam-
mation of the  pharynx, causing a sore
throat. Causes of pharyngitis include viral
and bacterial infections. Swallowing sub-
stances that scald, corrode, or scratch
the lining of the throat, and smoking,
may also cause pharyngitis. 
As well as a sore throat, there may 
be discomfort when swallowing, slight
fever, earache, and swollen  lymph nodes
in the neck.
Gargling with warm salt water and tak-
ing  analgesic drugs  is usually the only
treatment needed. If the sore throat is
severe or prolonged a doctor may take a
throat swab and prescribe antibiotic drugs.
pharynx The passage that connects the
back of the mouth and nose to the oeso-
phagus. The upper part, or nasopharynx,
connects the nasal cavity to the area
behind the soft palate. The middle part,
the oropharynx, runs from the naso-
pharynx to below the tongue. The lower
part, called the laryngopharynx, lies
behind and to each side of the larynx.
pharynx, cancer of A cancerous tumour
of the pharynx. Pharyngeal cancer usu-
ally develops in the mucous membrane
lining. In the West, almost all cases of
pharyngeal cancer are related to smoking
and to drinking alcohol. The incidence
rises with age, and the disorder is more
common in men.
Cancerous tumours of the oropharynx
(the middle section of the pharynx) usu-
ally cause difficulty swallowing, often
with a sore throat and earache. Blood-
stained sputum may be coughed up.
Sometimes there is only the feeling of a
lump in the throat or a visible enlarged
lymph node in the neck. Cancer of the
laryngopharynx (the lowermost part of
the pharynx) initially causes a sensation
of incomplete  swallowing, then a muf-
fled voice, hoarseness, and increased
difficulty in swallowing. Tumours of the
nasopharynx have different causes.
Diagnosis of cancer of the pharynx is
made by  biopsy, often in conjunction
with laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, or oeso-
phagoscopy. The growth may be removed
surgically or treated with  radiotherapy.
Anticancer drugs may also be given.
phencyclidine A drug of abuse, com-
monly known as angel dust or PCP.
phenelzine A monoamine oxidase inhib-
itor  antidepressant drug usually given
when other antidepressant drugs are
ineffective. Possible side effects include
dizziness, drowsiness, and rash, and,
when taken with certain foods or other
drugs, a dangerous rise in blood pressure.
phenobarbital A barbiturate drug used
mainly as an  anticonvulsant. It is often
used with  phenytoin to treat  epilepsy.
Possible side effects include drowsi-
ness, clumsiness, dizziness, excitement,
and confusion.
phenothiazine drugs A group of drugs
used to treat psychotic illnesses (see
antipsychotic drugs) and to relieve severe
nausea and vomiting (see  antiemetic
drugs). The group includes  chlorpro-
mazine, fluphenazine, and perphenazine. 
phenoxymethylpenicillin A synthetic
penicillin drug, which is an  antibiotic
prescribed to treat bacterial infections
including pharyngitis, tonsillitis, and
tooth abscess.
Possible adverse effects include rash
and nausea. A few people develop a
serious allergic reaction in which there
is wheezing, breathing difficulty, and
swelling around the mouth and eyes.
phenylbutazone A  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug  (NSAID) used to
relieve the symptoms of  ankylosing
spondylitis. Phenylbutazone may cause
nausea, fluid retention, rash, and peptic
ulcer. It may also increase the risk of
blood disorders. It is prescribed only
under hospital supervision, when other
drugs are ineffective.
phenylephrine A  decongestant drug
used to treat seasonal allergic  rhinitis
(hay fever) and the common  cold. As
eye-drops, it is used to dilate the pupils
for eye examinations. High doses or pro-
longed use of nasal preparations may
cause headache and blurred vision;
stopping taking the drug suddenly may
make nasal congestion worse.
phenylketonuria An inherited disorder
in which the  enzyme that converts the
amino acid phenylalanine into tyrosine
(another amino acid) is defective. Unless
phenylalanine is excluded from the diet,
it builds up in the body and causes
PHARYNGEAL POUCH PHENYLKETONURIA
P447
severe learning difficulties.All newborn
babies are given the  Guthrie test for
phenylketonuria. Affected babies show
few signs of abnormality, but, unless
phenylalanine is avoided, they develop
neurological disturbances including  epi-
lepsy. They may have blonde hair and
blue eyes, and their urine may have a
mousy odour. Many have eczema.
Phenylalanine is found in most protein-
containing foods and in artificial sweet-
eners. A specially modified diet is
generally recommended throughout life,
(and  especially during pregnancy, be-
cause high phenylalanine levels in the
mother can damage the fetus).
phenytoin An anticonvulsant drug used
to treat epilepsy and trigeminal neuralgia.
Side effects include nausea, dizziness,
tremor, and overgrown and tender gums.
pheromone A substance with a particu-
larodour that, when released in minute
quantities by an animal, affects the
behaviour or development of other indi-
viduals of the same species.
phimosis Tightness of the foreskin, pre-
venting it from being drawn back over the
glans (head) of the penis. In uncircum-
cised babies, some degree of phimosisis
normal, but it usually improves by age 3
or 4. In some boys, the condition persists
and may cause the foreskin to balloon
out on urination. Attempts to retract a
tight foreskin may make the condition
worse. Phimosis may also develop in
adult men, causing painful erection that
may lead to paraphimosis. Proper clean-
ing of the glans may not be possible, so
balanitis may develop. Treatment in both
adults and children is by circumcision.
phlebitis Inflammation of a vein. A clot
often develops, in which case the condi-
tion is termed thrombophlebitis.
phlebography The obtaining of  X-ray
images of veins that have been injected
with a  radiopaque  substance. An alter-
native name is venography.
phlebotomy Puncture of a vein to remove
blood (see venepuncture; venesection.)
phlegm See sputum.
phobia A persistent, irrational fear of,
and desire to avoid, a particular object
or situation. Many people have minor
phobias. A phobia is considered a psy-
chiatric disorder when it interferes with
normal social functioning.Simple pho-
bias (specific phobias) are the most
common. These may involve fear of par-
ticular animals or situations, such as
enclosed spaces (claustrophobia). Animal
phobias usually start in childhood, but
others develop at any time. Treatment
depends on the severity of the condi-
tion and the wishes of the individual. 
Agoraphobia is a more serious phobia,
often causing severe impairment. The
disorder usually starts in the late teens
or early 20s. Social phobia is fear of being
exposed to scrutiny, such as a fear of
eating or speaking in public. This disor-
der usually begins in late childhood or
early adolescence. 
Causes of phobias are unknown. Sim-
ple phobias are thought by some to be
a form of  conditioning. For example, a
person with a fear of dogs may have
been frightened by a dog in childhood. 
Exposure to the feared object or situa-
tion causes intense anxiety and, in some
cases, a  panic attack. Phobias may be
associated with depression or obsessive每
compulsivebehaviour. Treatment may be
with  behaviour therapy and sometimes
antidepressant drugs. 
phocomelia A limb defect in which the
feet and/or the hands are joined to the
trunk by short stumps. The condition is
extremely rare, but used to occur as a
side effect of women taking the drug
thalidomide in early pregnancy.
pholcodine A cough suppressant.
phosphates Salts  that are essential in
the diet. A phosphate compound called
ATP stores energy in cells.
phosphorus An essential mineral, pre-
sent in many foods, including cereals,
dairy products, and meat. In the body,
phosphorus is combined with  calcium
to form the bones and teeth.
photocoagulation Destructive heating
of tissue by intense light focused to a
fine point, as in laser treatment.
photophobia An uncomfortable sensi-
tivity or intolerance to light. It occurs
with eye disorders, such as corneal abra-
sion, and is a feature of meningitis.
photorefractive keratectomy A sur-
gical treatment for astigmatism, myopia,
and  hypermetropia, in which areas of
the cornea are shaved away by laser.
PHOTOREFRACTIVE KERATECTOMY PHENYTOIN
P448
photosensitivity Abnormal reaction to
sunlight. Photosensitivity usually causes
a rash on skin exposed to sunlight. This
often occurs because a photosensitizer
(such as some drugs, dyes, chemicals in
perfumes and soaps, and plants such as
mustard) has been ingested or applied
to the skin. Photosensitivity is also a fea-
tureof disorders such as systemic lupus
erythematosus.People who are suscepti-
ble to photosensitivity reactions should
avoid exposure to sunlight and photo-
sensitizers, and use sunscreens.
phototherapy Treatment with light, in-
cluding sunlight,  ultraviolet light, blue
light, or lasers. Moderate exposureto
sunlight is  the most basic form, and is
often helpful in treating psoriasis.
PUVA combines the use of long-wave
ultraviolet light with a  psoralen drug,
which sensitizes the skin to light. This is
used to treat psoriasis and other  skin
diseases such as  vitiligo. Psoriasis may
also be treated using short-wave ultravio-
let light, sometimes combined with the
application of coal tar. 
Visible blue light is used to treat
neonatal jaundice (see  jaundice, neona-
tal), which is due to high levels of the
pigment bilirubin in the blood. In pho-
totherapy, bilirubin is converted into a
harmless substance that can be excret-
ed. To maximize exposure, the baby is
undressed and placed  under the lights
in an incubator to keep him warm.
phrenic nerve One of the pair of main
nerves  supplying the  diaphragm. Each
phrenic nerve carries motor impulses to
the diaphragm, and plays a part in con-
trolling breathing. Injury to, or surgical
cutting of, 1 of the nerves results in para-
lysis of 1 half of the diaphragm.
physical examination See  examina-
tion, physical.
physical medicine and rehabilitation
A branch of medicine concerned with
caring for patients who have become
disabled through injury or illness.
physiology The study of body func-
tions,including  physical and chemical
processes of cells, tissues, organs, and
systems, and their various interactions. 
physiotherapy Treatment with physi-
cal methods or agents. Physiotherapy is
used to prevent or reduce joint stiffness;
restore muscle strength; reduce pain;
inflammation, and muscle spasm; and
retrain joints and muscles after stroke or
nerve injury. Methods include  heat
treatment, exercises, massage, ice-packs,
hydrotherapy, and TENS. Physiotherapy
is also used to maintain breathing in
people with impaired lung function,
and to prevent and treat pulmonary
complications  after surgery. Techniques
include breathing exercises,  postural
drainage, and administration of oxygen,
drugs, or moisturethrough a nebulizer. 
physostigmine A drug used in the form
of eye-drops to treat glaucoma.
PHOTOSENSITIVITY PHYSOSTIGMINE
P
PHOTOTHERAPY
Newborn
baby
Incubator
Lamp gives
off blue
fluorescent
light
PHOTOTHERAPY FOR NEONATAL JAUNDICE
Eye
shieldpilonidal sinus A pit in the skin, often
containing hairs, in the upper part of
the buttock cleft. The cause is probably
hair fragments growing inwards. Al-
though usually harmless, infection may
occur, causing recurrent, painful ab-
scesses. If  a sinus is infected, a wide
area around it is surgically removed.
Recurrence of infection is common, and
plastic surgery is sometimes required.
pimozide An  antipsychotic drug also
used to treat Gilles de la Tourette＊s syn-
drome. Pimozide may cause sedation, dry
mouth, constipation, and blurred vision.
pimple A small pustule or papule.
pindolol A  beta-blocker drug used to
treat  angina pectoris and  hypertension.
Possible side effects are typical of other
beta-blocker drugs, except that pindolol
is less likely to cause bradycardia.
pineal gland A tiny, cone-shaped struc-
ture deep within the  brain, whose sole
function appears to be the secretion of
melatonin in response to changes in light.
pinguecula A small, noncancerous, yel-
lowish spot on the conjunctiva over the
white of the eye. They are common in
elderly people, and may be removed for
cosmetic reasons. 
pink-eye See conjunctivitis.
pinna The fleshy part of the outer ear,
consisting of a flap of cartilage and skin.
It is also called the auricle. 
pins-and-needles A tingling or prickly
feeling in an area of skin that is usually
449
phyto- A prefix meaning of plant origin.
phytomenadione A form of vitamin K.
phyto-oestrogens Oestrogens that oc-
cur naturally in plants.
pia mater The innermost of the 3 mem-
branes of the meninges.
pica A craving to eat non-food substan-
ces such as earth or coal. Pica is common
in early childhood and may occur during
pregnancy. It may also occur in nutri-
tional or iron-deficiency disorders, and
in severe psychiatric disorders.
Pickwickian syndrome An unusual dis-
order characterized by extreme obesity,
shallow breathing, and sleep apnoea. The
cause is unclear. Symptoms usually im-
prove with weight loss.
PID See pelvic inflammatory disease.
pigeon toes A minor abnormality in
which the leg or foot is rotated, forcing
the foot and toes to point inwards. The
condition is common in toddlers.
pigmentation Coloration of the skin,
hair, and iris of the eyes by melanin. The
more melanin present, the darker the
coloration. Blood pigments can also
colour skin (such as in a bruise).
There are many abnormalities of pig-
mentation. Patches of pale skin occur in
psoriasis, pityriasis alba, pityriasis versi-
color, and vitiligo. Albinism is caused by
generalized melanin deficiency.  Phenyl-
ketonuria results in a reduced melanin
level, making sufferers pale-skinned and
fair-haired. Areas of dark skin may be
caused by disorders such as eczema or
psoriasis, pityriasis versicolor,  chloasma,
or by some perfumes and cosmetics
containing chemicals that cause photo-
sensitivity. Permanent areas of deep
pigmentation, such as freckles and moles
(see  naevus), are usually due to an
abnormality of melanocytes. Acanthosis
nigricans is characterized by dark patch-
es of velvet-like, thickened skin. Blood
pigments may lead to abnormal colour-
ing. Excess of the bile pigment bilirubin
in  jaundice turns the skin yellow, and
haemochromatosis turns the skin bronze.
piles A common name for haemorrhoids.
pill, contraceptive See oral contracep-
tives.
pilocarpine A drug used to treat  glau-
coma. It may initially cause blurred vision,
headache, and eye irritation.
PINS-AND-NEEDLES PHYTO-
P
PINEAL GLAND
Pineal gland
Cerebellum Corpus
callosum
Pituitary
gland
Cerebrum of brain450
associated with numbness and, some-
times, a burning feeling. The medical
term is paraesthesia. Transient pins-and-
needles is due to a temporary disturbance
in the conduction of nerve signals from
the skin. Persistent pins-and-needles may
be caused by neuropathy. 
pinta A skin infection,  caused by  TRE-
PONEMA CARATEUM, occurring in remote
villages in tropical America. A large spot
surrounded by smaller ones appears on
the face, neck, buttocks, hands, or feet.
After 1每12 months it is followed by red
skin patches that turn blue, then brown,
and finally white. A  penicillin drug or
tetracycline clears up the infection, but
the skin may be permanently disfigured.
pinworm infestation An alternative
name for threadworm infestation.
pioglitazone An oral hypoglycaemicdrug
that is used in combination with other
oral hypoglycaemics (either  metformin
or a sulphonylurea) in the treatment of
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Pioglitazone acts
by reducing peripheral insulin resistance.
Side effects may include gastrointestinal
disturbances, weight gain, and anaemia.
piperazine An  anthelmintic drug used
to treat  infestation by  roundworms and
threadworms. Possible adverse effects
include abdominal pain, nausea, vomit-
ing, and diarrhoea.
piroxicam A type of  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug (NSAID) that is used
to relieve the symptoms of types of
arthritis, and to relieve pain in bursitis,
tendinitis, and after minor surgery. Pos-
sible adverse effects include nausea,
indigestion, abdominal pain, swollen
ankles, peptic ulcer, and liver problems.
pituitary gland Sometimes referred to
as the master gland, the pituitary is the
most important endocrine gland. It regu-
lates and controls the activities of other
endocrine glands and many body pro-
cesses. The pituitary gland is a pea-sized
structure attached by a stalk of nerve
fibres to the hypothalamus. The anterior
lobe produces  growth hormone;  pro-
lactin;  ACTH; TSH (thyroid-stimulating
hormone), which stimulates hormone
production by the  thyroid gland; the
gonadotrophins FSH (follicle stimulating
hormone) and LH (luteinizinghormone);
and melanocyte-stimulating hormone
(MSH), which controls darkening of the
skin. The posterior pituitary secretes
ADH and oxytocin.
pituitary tumours Growths in the pitu-
itarygland. Pituitary tumours are rare,
and mostly noncancerous,  but  tumour
enlargement can put pressure on the
optic nerves, causing visual defects.
The causes of pituitary tumours are
unknown. They may lead to  inadequate
hormone production,  causing problems
such as cessation of menstrual periods
or reduced sperm production. They may
also cause the gland to produce excess
hormone. Overproduction of growth hor-
mone causes gigantism  or  acromegaly;
too much thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH) can lead to hyperthyroidism. 
Investigations include blood tests, 
X-rays, MRI of the pituitary, and usually
also  vision tests. Treatment may be by
surgical removal of the tumour,  radio-
therapy,hormone replacement, or a
combination of these techniques. The
drug bromocriptine may be used; it can
reduce production of certain hormones
and shrink some  tumours.
pityriasis alba A common skin condi-
tion of childhood and adolescence.
Irregular, fine, scaly, pale patches appear
on the face. Caused by mild  eczema,  it
usually clears up with emollients.
pityriasis rosea A common, mild skin
disorder in which a rash of flat, scaly-
PINTA PITYRIASIS ROSEA
P
PITUITARY GLAND
Blood vessels
Anterior lobe
of pituitary
gland
Posterior lobe
of pituitary
gland
Skull bone
Pituitary gland
LOCATION
Nerve
fibre Brain
Hypothalamusedged, pink spots or patches appears
on the trunk and upper arms. It is not
contagious and mainly affects children
and young adults. Its cause is unknown.
The rash lasts for 4每8 weeks, may cause
itching, and usually clears up without
treatment. Calamine lotion or  antihis-
tamine drugs may relieve any itching.
pityriasis versicolor A common skin
condition in which patches of white,
brown, or salmon-coloured flaking skin
appear on the trunk and neck. Also
known as tinea versicolor, it is caused
by a fungus that exists on most people＊s
skin. Treatment is with antifungal drugs. 
pivampicillin See penicillin drugs.
pivmecillinam See penicillin drugs.
pizotifen An antihistamine drug used to
prevent migraine in people with fre-
quent, disabling attacks. Adverse effects
can include nausea, dizziness, drowsi-
ness, dry mouth, and muscle pains.
Prolonged use may cause weight gain.
PKU test See Guthrie test.
placebo A chemically inert substance
given instead of a drug. Benefit may be
gained from a placebo because the per-
son taking it believes it will have a
positive effect. As the effectiveness of
any drug may be partly due to this
※placebo effect§, many new drugs are
tested against a placebo preparation. 
placenta The organ that develops in the
uterus during pregnancy and that link
the blood supplies of mother and baby.
The placenta develops from the chorion.
It is firmly attached to the lining of the
woman＊s uterus and is connected to the
baby by the umbilical cord. It is expelled
shortly after the baby is born. 
The placenta transfers oxygen and
nutrients from  the mother＊s circulation
into the fetus＊s circulation, and removes
waste products from the fetus＊s blood
into the mother＊s blood for excretion by
her lungs and kidneys. It also produces
hormones such as oestrogen, progester-
one, and human chorionic gonadotrophin
(HCG). High levels of HCG appear in the
woman＊s urine during early pregnancy,
and detection of them in the urine forms
the basis of pregnancy tests.
placental abruption Separation of all
or part of the placenta from the wall of
the uterus before the baby is delivered.
The exact cause is not known, but pla-
cental abruption is more  common in
women with long-term hypertension and
in those who have had the condition in
a previous pregnancy or who have had
several pregnancies. Smoking and high
alcohol intake may also contribute to
the risk of placental abruption. 
Symptoms usually occur suddenly and
depend on how much of the placenta has
separated from the wall of the uterus.
They include slight to heavy vaginal
bleeding,which can be severe haemor-
rhaging in complete separation; cramps
in the abdomen or backache; severe,
constant abdominal pain; and reduced
fetal movements. If the bleeding does
not stop, or if it
starts again, it may
be necessary to
induce labour (see
induction of labour).
A small placental
abruption is usu-
ally treated with
bed-rest in hospi-
tal. In more severe
cases of placental
abruption, an em-
ergency  caesarean
section is often nec-
essary to save the
the life of the fetus.
A blood  transfusion
is also sometimes
required.
PLACENTAL ABRUPTION PITYRIASIS VERSICOLOR
P
PLACENTA
Umbilical
artery
Umbilical vein
Flow of waste
from fetus＊s
blood to
mother＊s
Amniotic fluid
Placenta
LOCATION
Umbilical
cord
Fetus
Maternal artery Wall of uterus
Maternal vein
Chorionic
villus
Flow of oxygen and
nutrients from mother＊s
blood to fetus＊s
Umbilical cord
Lining of
uterus
(endometrium)
Mother＊s blood
451
Uterus452
placenta praevia Implantation of the
placenta in the lower part of the uterus,
near or over the cervix. Placenta praevia
occurs in about 1 in 200 pregnancies. It
varies in severity from marginal placen-
ta praevia, when the placenta reaches
the edge of the cervical opening, to
complete placental praevia, when the
entire opening of the cervix is covered.
Mild placenta praevia may have no
adverse effect. More severe cases often
cause painless vaginal bleeding in late
pregnancy. If the bleeding is slight and
the pregnancy still has several weeks to
run, bed rest in hospital may be all that
is necessary. The baby will probably be
delivered by  caesarean section at the
38th week. If the bleeding is heavy or if
the pregnancy is near term, an immedi-
ate delivery is carried out.
placenta, tumours of See choriocarci-
noma; hydatidiform mole.
plague A serious infectious disease that
is caused by the bacterium  YERSINIA
PESTIS. It mainly affects rodents but can
be transmitted to humans by flea bites.
There are2  main types: bubonic and
pneumonic plague. Bubonic plague is
characterized by swollen lymph glands
(called ※buboes§). Symptoms usually
start 2每5 days after infection, with fever,
shivering, and severe headache. Soon,
the smooth, red, intensely painful bu-
boes appear, usually in the groin. There
may be bleeding into the skin around
the buboes, causing dark patches. 
Pneumonic plague affects the lungs and
can spread from person to person in in-
fected droplets expelled during coughing.
Symptoms are severe coughing that pro-
duces a bloody, frothy  sputum and
laboured breathing. Without early treat-
ment, death is almost inevitable.
A sample of fluid from a bubo, or a
sputum sample, is taken to confirm the
diagnosis. Possible treatments include
streptomycin and tetracycline drugs.
plantar fasciitis Fasciitis of the sole of
the foot.
plantar wart See wart, plantar.
plants, poisonous Several species of
plant, including foxglove, holly, deadly
nightshade, and laburnum, are poison-
ous. Nettles, hogweed, poison ivy, and
primula cause skin reactions, including
rash and itching, on contact. Young chil-
drenare the most commonly affected.
Symptoms of poisoning vary according
to the plant but may include abdominal
pain, vomiting, flushing, breathing diffi-
culties, delirium, and  coma and require
urgent medical advice. Skin reactions
can be treated by application of alcohol
or calamine lotion; corticosteroid drugs
may be prescribed  for severe reactions.
Poisoning usually requires gastric lavage.
Fatal poisoning is rare. (See also mush-
room poisoning.)
plaque The term given to an area of
atherosclerosis. The plaques are symp-
tomless until they are large enough to
reduce blood flow or until the surface of
a plaque is disturbed, causing thrombo-
sis. Plaques in coronary arteries cause
coronary artery disease.
plaque, dental A rough, sticky coating
on the teeth consisting of saliva, bacte-
ria, and food debris. It is the chief cause
of tooth decay (see  caries, dental) and
gingivitis, and forms the basis of a hard
deposit (see  calculus, dental). Some of
the microorganisms in plaque, particu-
larly STREPTOCOCCUS MUTANS, break down
sugar in the remains of carbohydrate
food that sticks to the mucus, creating
an acid that can erode tooth enamel.
plasma The fluid part of  blood that
remains if the blood cells are removed. 
plasmapheresis A procedure for the
removal or reduction in concentration
of unwanted substances in the blood;
PLACENTA PRAEVIA PLASMAPHERESIS
P
PLACENTA PRAEVIA
Placenta
MARGINAL 
PLACENTA PRAEVIA
Cervix
COMPLETE
PLACENTA PRAEVIA
Amniotic fluid Uterus
Placenta Cervix453
also called plasma exchange. Blood is
withdrawn from the body and the plas-
ma portion is removed by machines
called cell separators. The blood cells
are then mixed with a plasma substitute
and returned to the circulation. Plasma-
pheresis is used to remove damaging
antibodies or antibody-antigen particles
from the circulation in autoimmune dis-
orders such as  myasthenia gravis and
Goodpasture＊s syndrome. 
plasma proteins Proteins present in
blood  plasma, including  albumin, blood
clotting proteins, and immunoglobulins. 
plasminogen activator See tissue plas-
minogen activator.
plaster cast See cast.
plaster of Paris A white powder made
of a calcium compound that, when mixed
with water, produces a paste that can be
shaped before it sets. Plaster of Paris is
used for constructing casts and making
dental models (see impression, dental). 
plastic surgery Any operation carried
out to repair or reconstruct skin and tis-
sue that has been damaged or lost, is
malformed, or has changed with aging.
Plastic surgery is often performed after
severe burns or injuries, cancer, or some
operations, such as mastectomy. Congen-
ital conditions that may require plastic
surgery include cleft lip and palate, hypo-
spadias, and imperforate anus (see anus,
imperforate). Techniques include  skin
grafts, skin flaps, and Z-plasty; these may
be combined with  implants or a  bone
graft.  Microsurgery allows transfer of
tissue to other parts of the body. (See
also cosmetic surgery.)
-plasty A suffix meaning shaping by
surgery; performing plastic surgery on.
platelet The smallest type of blood cell,
also called a thrombocyte. Platelets play
a major role in blood clotting. 
platyhelminth A flat or ribbon-shaped
parasitic worm. (See liver fluke, schisto-
somiasis, tapeworm) 
play therapy A method used in the
psychoanalysis of young children, based
on the principle that all play has some
symbolic significance. Watching a child
at play helps a therapist diagnose the
source of the child＊s problems; the child
can then be helped to ※act out§ thoughts
and feelings that are causing anxiety.
plethora A florid, bright-red, flushed
complexion. It may be caused by dila-
tion of blood vessels, or, less commonly,
by polycythaemia.
plethysmography A way of estimating
the blood flow in vessels by measuring
changes in the size of a body part. 
pleura A thin, 2-layered membrane, 1
layer covering the outside of the lungs
and the other lining the inside of the
chest  cavity. Fluid between the layers
provides  lubrication, allowing smooth
movement of the lungs during breathing.
pleural effusion An accumulation of
fluid between the layers of the  pleura, 
making breathing difficult. Pleural effu-
sion may be caused by  pneumonia,
tuberculosis,  heart failure,  cancer,  pul-
monary embolism, or mesothelioma. 
Diagnosis is confirmed by chest X-ray.
Some fluid may be removed with a nee-
dle and syringe and examined to find
the cause. A  biopsy of the pleura may
also be needed. The underlying cause is
treated and fluid may be drained off to
relieve breathing problems.
pleurisy Inflammation of the  pleura.
Causes include lung infections, such as
pneumonia, or, more rarely,  pulmonary
embolism, lung cancer, and  rheumatoid
arthritis. Pleurisy causes a sharp chest
pain, which is worse when breathing in.
Treatment is of the underlying cause,
along with analgesic drugs. 
pleurodynia Pain in the chest caused
by coxsackievirus B infection. Sometimes
PLEURODYNIA PLASMA PROTEINS
P
PLEURA
Lung
Pleura
Bronchus
Trachea454
called Bornholm disease, it often occurs
in epidemics and usually affects chil-
dren. There is sudden severe pain in the
lower chest or upper abdomen, with
fever, sore throat, headache, and malaise.
The disease usually settles in 3每4 days
without treatment. 
plexus A network of interwoven nerves
or blood vessels..
plication A surgical procedure in which
tucks are taken in the walls of a hollow
organ and then stitched to decrease the
size of the organ. 
Plummer每Vinson syndrome Difficul-
tyin swallowing due to webs of tissue
forming across the upper  oesophagus.
The syndrome often occurs with severe
iron-deficiency  anaemia and affects
middle-aged women.  
plutonium A radioactive metallic ele-
ment which occurs naturally only in
uranium ores; it is produced artificially
in breeder reactors.
PMS The abbreviation for  premenstrual 
syndrome.
PMT The abbreviation for premenstrual
tension (an alternative name for  pre-
menstrual syndrome).
pneumaturia The presence of gas in
the urine, usually indicating that a  fis-
tula has developed between the bladder
and the intestine.
pneumo- A prefix meaning related to
the lungs, to air, or to the breath. 
pneumococcus Acommon name for
STREPTOCOCCUS PNEUMONIAE (see  Strep-
tococcal infections).
pneumoconiosis Any of a group of
lung diseases caused by the inhalation
of certain mineral dusts. Only dust par-
ticles less than 0.005mm across reach
the alveoli (air sacs) in the lungs. The
particles accumulate and may cause
thickening and scarring. The main types
of pneumoconiosis are asbestosis (see
asbestos-related diseases), coal workers＊
pneumoconiosis, and silicosis, caused
by silica dust. These diseases primarily
affect workers aged over 50. However,
the incidence is falling due to better
preventive measures.
Pneumoconiosis is often detected by
a chest X-ray before symptoms develop.
The main symptom is shortness of
breath. In severe cases,  cor pulmonale
or emphysema may develop. The risk of
tuberculosis or  lung cancer is increased
following asbestos or haematite expo-
sure. Diagnosis is based on a history of
exposure to dusts, chest X-rays, medi-
cal examination, and pulmonary function
tests. There is no treatment apart from
treating any complications. Further expo-
sure to dust must be avoided. 
pneumocystis pneumonia An infection
of the lungs caused by  PNEUMOCYSTIS
CARINII, a type of protozoa. Pneumocystis
pneumonia is an opportunistic infection
that is dangerous only to people with im-
paired resistance to infection. It is
particularly common in those with AIDS.
Symptoms include fever, dry cough, and
shortness of breath lasting weeks to
months. Diagnosis is made by examina-
tion of sputum or a lung  biopsy. High
doses of antibiotic drugs (commonly co-
trimoxazole) may eradicate the infec-
tion; they may also be used over the
long term to prevent infection in those
people at increased risk. 
pneumonectomy Surgery carried out to
remove a lung. 
pneumonia Inflammation of the lungs
due to infection. There are 2 main types:
lobar pneumonia and bronchopneu-
monia. Lobar pneumonia initially affects
1 lobe of a lung. In bronchopneumonia,
inflammation initially startsin the
bronchi and bronchioles (airways).
Pneumonia can be caused by any type
of microorganism, but most cases are
due to viruses, such as adenovirus, or
bacteria, such as  STREPTOCOCCUS PNEU-
MONIAE,  HAEMOPHILUS INFLUENZAE, and
STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS. Symptoms are
usually fever, chills, shortness of breath,
and a cough that produces yellow-green
sputum and occasionally blood. Potential
complications include  pleural effusion,
pleurisy, and a lung abscess.
Diagnosis is made by physical exami-
nation,  chest X-ray, and examining
sputum and blood for microorganisms.
Treatment depends on the cause, and
may include antibiotic drugs or antifun-
gal drugs.  Aspirin  or  paracetamol may
be given to reduce fever, and, in severe
cases, oxygen therapy and artificial ven-
tilation may be needed. In most cases,
recovery usually occurs within 2 weeks.
PLEXUS PNEUMONIA
P455
pneumonitis Inflammation of the lungs
that may cause coughing, breathing diffi-
culty, and wheezing. Causes  include an
allergic reaction to dust containing ani-
mal or plant material (see alveolitis) and
exposure to radiation (see radiation haz-
ards). Pneuomonitis may also occur as a
side effect of drugs, such as amiodarone
and azathioprine. 
pneumothorax A condition in which air
enters the pleural cavity (the space
between the layers of the pleura). Symp-
toms are chest pain or shortness of
breath. If air continues to leak, the pneu-
mothorax may grow to produce a tension
pneumothorax. This may be life-threat-
ening.Diagnosis is confirmed by  chest
X-ray. A small pneumothorax may dis-
appear in a few days without treatment.
If not, treatment involves removing the
air through a tube with a one-way valve. 
pocket, gingival See periodontitis.
podiatry A paramedical speciality con-
cerned with the feet (see chiropody).
podophyllin A drug used to treat geni-
tal warts (see  warts, genital). It may
cause irritation of the treated area and
severe toxicity on excessive application.
poison A substance that, in relatively
small amounts, disrupts the structure
and/or function of cells. (See also drug
poisoning; poisoning.)
poisoning Poisons may be swallowed,
inhaled, absorbed through skin, or inject-
ed under the skin (as with an insect
sting). Poisons may also originate in the
body, as when bacteria produce endotox-
ins, or when metabolic disorders produce
poisonous substances or allow them to
build up. Poisoning may be acute (a
large amount of poison over a short
time) or chronic (gradual accumulation
of poison that is not eliminated quickly).
Unintentional poisoning occurs mainly
in young children. Adults may be poi-
soned by mistaking the dosage of a
prescribed drug (see drug poisoning), by
taking very high doses of vitamin or
mineral supplements, by exposure to
poisonous substances in industry, or by
drug abuse. Poisoning may also be a
deliberate attempt to commit suicide. 
polio An abbreviation for poliomyelitis. 
poliomyelitis An infectious viral dis-
ease, also called polio. It is usually
mild, but in serious cases, it attacks the
brain and  spinal cord, sometimes caus-
ing paralysis or death. The virus is spread
from the faeces of infected people to
food. Airborne transmission also occurs.
In countries with poor hygiene and sani-
tation, most children develop immunity
through being infected early in life,
when the infection rarely causes serious
illness. In countries with better stan-
dards, this does not occur and, if
children are not vaccinated, epidemics
can occur. In the UK, polio is now very
rare due to a vaccination programme.
Most infected children have no symp-
toms. In others, there is a slight fever,
sore throat, headache, and vomiting
after a 3每5-day  incubation period. Most
children recover completely, but inflam-
mation of the  meninges may develop.
Symptoms are fever, severe  headache,
stiff neck and back, and aching muscles,
sometimes with widespread  twitching.
Often, extensive paralysis, usually of the
legs and lower trunk, occurs in a few
hours. If infection spreads to the brain-
stem, problems with, or total loss of,
swallowing and breathing may result.
Diagnosis is made by  lumbar puncture,
throat swab, or a faeces sample. Charac-
teristic paralysis with an acute feverish
illness allows an immediate diagnosis.
There is no effective drug treatment for
polio. Nonparalytic patients usually need
bed rest and analgesicdrugs. In paraly-
sis,  physiotherapy and, in some cases,
catheterization, tracheostomy, and artifi-
cial ventilation are needed.
Recovery from nonparalytic polio is
complete. More than half of those with
paralysis make a full recovery, fewer
than a quarter are left with severe dis-
ability, and fewer than 1 in 10 dies.
In the UK, vaccination against polio is
given at about age 2, 3, and 4 months,
with a booster dose at  about 5 years
(see  immunization). Parents and carers
should also be immunized because the
active vaccine can cause polio.
pollution Contamination of the environ-
ment by poisons, radioactive substances,
microorganisms, or other wastes.
poly- A prefix meaning many or much.
polyarteritis nodosa An uncommon
disease of medium-sized arteries, also
POLYARTERITIS NODOSA PNEUMONITIS
P456
called periarteritis nodosa. Areas of arter-
ial wall become inflamed, weakened, and
liable to  aneurysms. The severity of the
condition depends on the arteries that
are affected  and how much they are
weakened. The cause seems to be an
immune system disturbance, sometimes
triggered by exposure to the hepatitis B
virus. It is most common in adults and
affects men more than women. 
Early symptoms of polyarteritis nodosa
include fever, aching muscles and joints,
general malaise, loss of appetite and
weight, and, sometimes, nerve pain.
There is also hypertension, skin ulcera-
tion, and  gangrene. If the coronary
arteries are affected, myocardial infarc-
tion may occur. Many patients suffer
abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diar-
rhoea, and blood in the faeces.
Diagnosis is made by biopsy and angio-
graphy. Large doses of  corticosteroids,
and in some cases  immunosuppressants,
may allow survival for at least 5 years.
Without treatment, few patients survive
for this length of time.
polycystic kidney See  kidney, poly-
cystic.
polycystic ovary See ovary, polycystic.
polycythaemia A condition in which
increased production of red bloodcells
leads to an unusually large number of
them in the blood. This condition is
usually caused by another disorder or
by  hypoxia, and is called secondary
polycythaemia. If it occurs for no appar-
ent reason, it is called polycythaemia
vera or primary polycythaemia. 
Secondary polycythaemia occurs natu-
rally at high altitudes due to the
reduced oxygen level. It can also result
from a disorder that impairs the oxygen
supply to the blood, or can be secon-
dary to  liver cancer or some kidney
disorders.Descending to sea level, or
effective treatment of an underlying dis-
order, returns the blood to normal.
Polycythaemia vera is a rare disorder
that mainly affects people over 40. The
large number of red blood cells causes
increased volume and thickening of the
blood, which may lead to headaches,
blurred vision, and hypertension. There
may also be flushed skin, dizziness, night
sweats, and widespread itching. The
spleen is often enlarged. Possible com-
plications include a tendency to bleed
easily or to form blood clots; stroke; and
myelofibrosis or acute leukaemia (see
leukaemia, acute). 
Diagnosis is made from a physical
examination and blood tests and by rul-
ing out other causes. Treatment is by
venesection, sometimes in combination
with anticancer drugs or with radioactive
phosphorus. This enables most patients
to survive for 10每15 years. 
polydactyly A birth defect in which
there is an excessive number of fingers
or toes. The extra digits may be fully
formed or they may be fleshy stumps.
Polydactyly often runs in otherwise nor-
mal families; however, it may also occur
as part of  Laurence每Biedl每Moon syn-
drome or other congenital syndromes. 
polydipsia Persistent excessive thirst
(see thirst, excessive).
polyhydramnios Excess  amniotic fluid
surrounding the fetus during pregnancy.
It occurs in about 1 in 250 pregnancies
and often has no known cause. The con-
dition sometimes occurs if the fetus has
a malformation that makes normal swal-
lowing impossible, or if the pregnant
woman has diabetes mellitus. The excess
amniotic fluid usually accumulates in
the 2nd half of pregnancy, producing
symptoms from about week 32. The main
symptom is abdominal discomfort. Other
possible symptoms are breathlessness
and swelling of the legs. The uterus is
larger than would usually be expected.
Occasionally,  fluid accumulates  rapidly,
POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY POLYHYDRAMNIOS
P
POLYCYTHAEMIA
FLUSHED SKIN OF POLYCYTHAEMIA457
causing abdominal pain, breathlessness,
nausea, and vomiting, and leg swelling.
Premature labour may result.
The condition is usually evident from
a physical examination, but  ultrasound
scanning may be needed. In mild cases,
only rest is needed. In more severe
cases, amniotic fluid may be withdrawn
using a needle. In late pregnancy, induc-
tion of labour may be performed. 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) A
method of rapidly copying  DNA se-
quences so that they can be analysed.
polymyalgia rheumatica An uncom-
mon disease of elderly people, marked
by pain and stiffness in the muscles of
the  hips, thighs, shoulders, and neck.
Symptomsare  worse in the mornings.
The cause is unknown, but the condition
may be associated with temporal arteri-
tis. It is unusual before the age of 50. 
The diagnosis is often difficult to con-
firm and is based on the patient＊s history,
a physical examination, and blood tests
(including an ESR). If temporal arteritis
is suspected, a biopsy may be performed
on an artery at the side of the scalp.
Corticosteroid drugs  usually improve
the condition within a few days.
polymyositis A rare disease in which
the muscles are inflamed and weak.
polymyxins A group of antibiotic drugs
derived from the bacterium  BACILLUS
POLYMYXA. Polymyxins, which include
colistin, are commonly given to treat
eye, ear, and skin infections.
polyp A growth that projects, usually on
a stalk, from the lining of the nose, the
cervix, the intestine, the larynx, or any
other  mucous membrane. Some types
are liable to develop into cancer, and
are surgically removed.
polypeptide A compound consisting of
many peptides.
polypharmacy The practice of pres-
cribing several drugs to 1 person at the
same time.
polyposis, familial A rare, inherited dis-
order, also known as polyposis coli, in
which many polyps are present through-
out the gut, but mainly in the colon. If
not treated, cancer of the colon (see
colon, cancer of) is almost certain to
develop. The polyps may appear from
age 10. They may cause bleeding and
diarrhoea; however, there are often no
symptoms until cancer has developed.
The polyps are detected by colonoscopy.
Since there is a 50 per cent chance
that children of an affected person will
inherit the disease, medical surveillance
is necessary from around the age of 12.
Individual polyps may be cauterized (see
cauterization). The high risk of developing
cancer  often means that a  colectomy
and an ileostomy are performed. 
polyunsaturated fats Fats (see fats and
oils) with with relatively few hydrogen
atoms in their chemical structure. Poly-
unsaturated fats tend to protect against
cardiovascular disease.
polyuria See urination, excessive.
PoM The abbreviation for  prescription-
only medicine.
pompholyx An acute form of eczema in
which itchy blisters form on the palms
and/or soles. The condition, also called
dyshydrotic eczema, is sometimes due
to an allergic response. Rarely, it is asso-
ciated with ringworm. Treatment is with
an astringent or with topical application
of a corticosteroid drug.
pons The middle part of the brainstem.
pore A tiny opening, usually in the skin.
porphyria Any of a group of uncom-
mon and usually inherited disorders
caused by the accumulation of sub-
stances called porphyrins. Sufferers
often have a rash or blistering brought
on by sunlight, and certain drugs may
cause abdominal pain and nervous sys-
tem disturbances. Porphyrins are
formed in the body during the manufac-
ture of haem (a component of  haemo-
globin). A block in this manufacture
causes a build-up of porphyrins. Such
blocks are the result of various enzyme
deficiencies, which are genetic disorders.
Porphyria may also be due to poisoning.
There are 6 types of porphyria. Acute
intermittent porphyria usually appears
in early adulthood, causing abdominal
pain, and often limb cramps, muscle
weakness, and psychiatric disturbances.
The patient＊s urine turns red when left
to stand.  Barbiturate drugs,  phenytoin,
oral contraceptives, and  tetracyclines
precipitate attacks.
Variegate porphyria has similar effects
but also causes blistering of sun-exposed
PORPHYRIA POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION
P458
skin. Hereditary coproporphyria also has
similar effects and may cause addi-
tional skin symptoms.
Protoporphyria usually causes skin
symptoms after exposure to sunlight, as
does porphyria cutanea tarda. In this
type, wounds are slow to heal, and
urine is sometimes pink or brown. Many
cases are precipitated by liver disease. 
The rarest and most serious form, con-
genital erythropoietic porphyria, causes
red discoloration of urine and the teeth,
excessive hair growth, severe skin blis-
tering and ulceration, and haemolytic
anaemia. Death may occur in childhood.
Diagnosis is made from abnormal lev-
els of porphyrins in the urine and faeces.
Treatment is difficult. Avoidingsunlight
and/or precipitating drugs is the most
important  measure. Acute intermittent
porphyria, variegate porphyria, and hered-
itary coproporphyria may be helped by
administration of  glucose or  haematin.
Cases of porphyria cutanea tarda may be
helped by venesection.
portal hypertension Increased blood
pressure in the portal vein, which car-
ries blood from the stomach, intestine, 
and spleen to the liver. This causes
oesophageal varices, which may rupture
and cause internal bleeding, and ascites.
The most common cause of portal
hypertension is cirrhosis.
Diagnosis is usually made from the
symptoms and signs. Dopplerultrasound
scanning may be used to assess the pres-
sure in the portal vein. Various treatments
may be used to stop bleeding or prevent
further bleeding. For example, ruptured
blood vessels may be treated by scle-
rotherapy, in which a chemical is injected
into the veins to block them. A shunt is
sometimes carried out to prevent fur-
ther bleeding. Ascites is controlled by
restriction of salt and with diuretic drugs.
port-wine stain A purple-red birth-
mark that is level with the skin＊s surface.
It is a permanent type of haemangioma.
positron emission tomography See
PET scanning.
posseting A term for the regurgitation
of small quantities of milk by infants
after they have been fed. 
postcoital contraception See  contra-
ception, emergency.
posterior Relating to the back of the
body, or referring to the rear part.
postherpetic neuralgia Burning pain
caused by nerve irritation that occurs at
the site of a previous attack of  herpes
zoster (shingles). See neuralgia.
postmaturity A condition in which a
pregnancy persists for longer than 42
weeks; the average length of a normal
pregnancy is 40 weeks (see  gestation).
Postmaturity may be associated with a
family tendency to prolonged pregnancy,
or it may be a sign that the baby is
unable to descend properly (see engage-
ment). The risk of fetal death increases
after 42 weeks because the placenta be-
comes less efficient. Postmature infants
tend to have dry skin and may be more
susceptible to infection. 
postmortem examination An alterna-
tive term for an autopsy.
postmyocardial infarction syndrome
Another name for Dressler＊s syndrome.
postnasal drip A watery or sticky dis-
charge from the back of the nose into
the nasopharynx. The fluid may cause a 
cough, hoarseness, or the feeling of a
foreign body. The usual cause is rhinitis.
postnatal care Care of the mother after
childbirth until about 6 weeks later. 
postnatal depression Depression in a
woman after  childbirth. The cause is
probably a combination of sudden hor-
monal changes and psychological and
environmental factors. The depression
ranges from an extremely common and
mild, shortlived episode (※baby blues§)
to a rare, severe depressive psychosis.
Most mothers first get the ※blues§ 4每5
days after childbirth and may feel mis-
erable, irritable, and tearful. The cause
is hormonal changes, perhaps coupled
with a sense of anticlimax or an over-
whelming sense of responsibility for the
baby. With reassurance and support, the
depression usually passes in 2每3 days. In
about 10每15 per cent of women, the
depression lasts for weeks and causes a
constant feeling of tiredness, difficulty
in sleeping, loss of appetite, and rest-
lessness. The condition usually clears
up of its own accord or is treated with
antidepressant drugs.
Depressive psychosis usually starts 2每3
weeks after childbirth, causing severe
PORTAL HYPERTENSIONPOSTNATAL DEPRESSION
P459
mental confusion, feelings of worthless-
ness, threats of suicide or harmto the
baby, and sometimes delusions. Hospital
admission, ideally with the baby, and
antidepressant drugs are often needed.
postpartum depression See postnatal
depression.
postpartum haemorrhage Excessive
blood loss after  childbirth. It is more
common after a long labour or after a
multiple birth. The haemorrhage is usu-
ally due to excessive bleeding from the
site where the placenta was attached to
the uterus.
post-traumatic stress disorder A
form of anxiety that develops after a
stressful or frightening event. Common
causes include natural disasters, vio-
lence, rape, torture, serious physical
injury, and military combat. Symptoms,
which may develop many months after
the event, include recurring memories
or dreams of the event, a sense of pers-
onal isolation, and disturbed sleep and
concentration. There may be a deadening
of feelings, or irritability and feelings of
guilt, sometimes building up to depres-
sion. Most people recover, in time, with
emotional support and counselling. 
postural drainage A technique that
enables sputum (phlegm) or other se-
cretions to drain from a person＊s lungs
in order to clear them. The person lies
in a way that allows the secretions to
drain by gravity into the  trachea, from
where they are coughed up. Tapping the
person＊s chest with cupped hands can
help to loosen sticky secretions.
postural hypotension See hypotension.
posture The relative position of different
parts of the body at rest or during 
movement. Good posture consists of
balancing the body weight around the
body＊s centre of gravity in the lower spine
and pelvis. Maintaining good posture
helps prevent neck pain and back pain. 
post-viral fatigue syndrome See my-
algic encephalomyelitis.
potassium A  mineral needed to help
maintain normal heart rhythm, regulate
the body＊s water balance, conduct nerve
impulses, and contract muscles. Dietary
sources of potassium include lean meat,
whole grains, green leafy vegetables,
beans, and various fruits, such as apri-
cots, dates, and peaches.
A low level of potassium in the blood
is known as hypokalaemia. It is usually
a result of loss of fluids through diar-
rhoea and/or vomiting, and causes
fatigue, drowsiness, dizziness, and mus-
cle weakness. In more severe cases,
there may be abnormal heart rhythms
and muscle paralysis.
Excess potassium in the blood is
known as hyperkalaemia and is much
less common than hypokalaemia. It may
be due to excessive intake of potassium
supplements, severe kidney failure, Addi-
son＊s disease, or prolonged treatment with
potassium-sparing
diuretics. The effects
of high potassium
levels in the blood
can include numb-
ness and tingling,
disturbances of the
heart rhythm,and
muscle paralysis. In
severe cases, there
may be heart failure.
potassium channel
activators A class
of drugs that are
used in the pre-
vention and long-
term treatment of
angina. Nicorandil is
a potassium channel
activator that acts
POTASSIUM CHANNEL ACTIVATORS POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION
P
POSTURAL DRAINAGE
Parent
Physiotherapist
Chest tapped
to loosen
secretions
POSTURAL DRAINAGE WITH CHEST PHYSIOTHERAPY
Head low
to allow
secretions
to drain460
in a similar way to nitrates, and widens
both arteries and veins. Possible side
effects include flushing, nausea, vomit-
ing, and dizziness. 
potassium citrate A substance used to
relieve discomfort in mild  urinary tract
infections by making the urine less acid.
potassium permanganate A drug that
has an  antiseptic and  astringent effect;
and is useful in the treatment of derma-
titis. It can occasionally cause irritation
and can stain skin and clothing.
potency The ability of a man to perform
sexual intercourse; or the ability of a
drug to cause desired effects.
Pott＊s fracture A combined fracture and
dislocation of the ankle caused by exces-
sive or violent twisting. The fibula breaks
just above the ankle; in addition, the
tibia breaks or the ligaments tear, result-
ing in dislocation. 
poultice A warm pack consisting of a
soft, moist substance (such as  kaolin)
spread between layers of soft fabric.
pox Any of various infectious diseases
characterized by blistery skin eruptions
(for example chickenpox). Pox is some-
times used as a slang word for syphilis.
pravastatin A lipid-lowering drug.
praziquantel An  anthelmintic drug used
to treat  tapeworm infestation. Adverse
effects may include dizziness, drowsi-
ness, and abdominal pain.
prazosin A vasodilator drug used to treat
hypertension, heart failure, and Raynaud＊s
disease. Prazosin is also used to treat uri-
nary symptoms resulting from an enlarged
prostate gland (see prostate, enlarged).
Side effects include dizziness and faint-
ing, nausea, headache, and dry mouth.
precancerous A term applied to any
condition in which there is a tendency for
cancer to develop. There are 3 types of
such conditions. In the 1st, there are no
tumours present but the condition car-
ries an increased risk of cancer. In the
2nd, there are noncancerous tumours
that tend to  become cancerous or are
associated with the development of can-
cerous tumours elsewhere. The 3rd type
comprises disorders which have irregu-
lar features from the beginning but do
not always become fully cancerous. 
precocious puberty The development of
secondary sexual characteristics  before
age 8 in girls and 9 in boys. It is uncom-
mon and may be caused by various
disorders that can result in production
of sex hormones at an abnormally early
age. Possible underlying causes include
a brain tumour or other brain abnormali-
ties; abnormality of the adrenal glands
(for example,  congenital adrenal hyper-
plasia); ovarian cysts, and  tumours, or a
tumour in the testes. In some cases, no
underlying cause can be identified.
The hormones may cause a premature
growth spurt followed by early fusion of
the bones. As a result, affected children
may initially be tall but, if untreated, final
height is often greatly reduced. 
The child＊s pattern of pubertal devel-
opment is assessed by a doctor. Blood
tests are performed to measure hor-
mone levels. Ultrasound scanning of the
ovaries and testes, and CT scanning of
the adrenal glands or brain, may also be
carried out, depending on the underly-
ing cause suspected.
Treatment is of the underlying cause,
and hormone drugs may be given to
delay puberty and increase final height.
predisposing factors Factors that lead
to increased susceptibility to a disease. 
prednisolone A corticosteroid drug.
prednisone A corticosteroid drug.
pre-eclampsia A serious condition in
which hypertension, oedema, and protein-
uria develop in the last (3rd) trimester
of pregnancy. If severe, symptoms may
include headache, nausea and vomiting,
abdominal  pain, and visual disturban-
ces. The  condition, which is sometimes
called pre-eclamptic toxaemia or PET, is
more common in 1st pregnancies and if
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or kid-
ney disease is present. Untreated
pre-eclampsia may lead to  eclampsia.
For some cases of pre-eclampsia, treat-
ment is bed-rest and  antihypertensive
drugs. In late pregnancy, or if severe,
induction of labour or  caesarean section
may be necessary. 
pregnancy The period from conception
to birth. Pregnancy begins with the  fer-
tilization of an ovum (egg) and its
implantation. The egg develops into the
placenta and the  embryo, which grows
to form the fetus. Most eggs implant
into the uterus. Very occasionally, an
POTASSIUM CITRATE PREGNANCY 
Pegg implants into an abnormal site,
such as a fallopian tube, resulting in an
ectopic pregnancy.
A normal pregnancy lasts around 40
weeks from the first day of the woman＊s
last menstrual period. It is divided into
3 stages (trimesters) of 3 months each.
For the first 8 weeks of pregnancy, the
developing baby is called an embryo;
thereafter it is called a fetus.
In the 1st trimester the breasts start to
swell and may become tender. Morning
sickness is common. The baby＊s major
organs have developed by the end of
this stage. During the 2nd trimester, the
mother＊s nipples enlarge and darken
and weight rises rapidly. The baby is
usually felt moving by 22 weeks. During
the 3rd trimester, stretch marks and
colostrum may appear, and Braxton Hick＊s
contractions may be felt. The baby＊s
head engages at about 36 weeks.
Common, minor health problems dur-
ing pregnancy include constipation,
haemorrhoids,  heartburn,  pica, swollen
ankles, and  varicose veins. Other com-
mon disorders include  urinary tract
infections,stress incontinence (see  in-
continence, urinary), and candidiasis.
Complications of pregnancy and disor-
ders that affect it include  antepartum
haemorrhage;  diabeticpregnancy;  mis-
carriage; polyhydramnios; pre-eclampsia;
prematurity; and Rhesusincompatibility.
(See also  childbirth;  fetal heart monitor-
ing; pregnancy, multiple.)
pregnancy, drugs in Certain drugs
taken during pregnancy may pass to the
fetus through the  placenta or interfere
with fetal development. This may lead
to birth defects. Although relatively few
drugs have been proved to cause harm
to a developing baby, no drug should be
considered completely safe, especially
during early pregnancy. For this reason,
pregnant women should seek advice
from their doctor or pharmacist before
taking any drug, including over-the-
counter preparations,
Problems may also be caused in a
developing baby if a pregnant woman
drinks  alcohol, smokes (see  tobacco-
smoking), or takes drugs of abuse. The
babies of women who use heroin during
pregnancy tend to have a low birthweight
and a higher death rate than normal
during the first few weeks of life. Babies
of women who abuse drugs intravenously
are at high risk of HIV infection.
pregnancy, false An uncommon psy-
chological disorder, medically known as
pseudocyesis, in which a woman has
physical signs of pregnancy, including
morning sickness,  amenorrhoea  (ab-
sence of periods), enlarged breasts, and
abdominal swelling, but is not pregnant.
The woman is convinced that she is
pregnant. Treatment for false pregnancy
PREGNANCY
Fetus
Enlarging
uterus
Slightly
swollen
breasts 
Intestine
Uterus
Fetus
AT 12 WEEKS AT 24 WEEKS AT 36 WEEKS
Fully
formed
fetus
Head of
fetus over
pelvis
Mucus plug
protecting fetus
from infection
Enlarged
milk
glands
Swollen
abdomen
Slightly
thickened
waistline
Intestine
compressed
by uterus
Bladder
461
PREGNANCY, FALSE PREGNANCY, DRUGS IN
P462
may involve  counselling or  psychother-
apy. (See also conversion disorder.)
pregnancy, multiple The presence of
more than 1 fetus in the uterus. Multi-
ple pregnancy can occur if 2 or more
ova (eggs) are fertilized at the same
time, or if a single fertilized egg divides
early in development. 
Twins occur in about 1 in 80 pregnan-
cies, triplets in about 1 in 8,000, and
quadruplets in about 1 in 73,000. Multi-
ple pregnancies are more common in
women who are treated with  fertility
drugs or if a number of fertilized ova are
implanted during in vitro fertilization.
pregnancy tests Tests on urine or blood
performed to determine whether or not
a woman is pregnant. Pregnancy testing
kits that are available from pharmacies
allow testing to be carried out at home.
All of the kits test for the presence of
human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG) in
a sample of urine. This hormone is nor-
mally produced only by a developing
placenta, and therefore the tests are
extremely accurate (about 97 per cent
accurate for a positive result and about
80 per cent accurate for a negative
result), even in early pregnancy. Details
for using a test vary with different
brands; but all kits involve dipping a
test stick that has been treated with a
chemical that reacts with HCG into a
sample of urine. Blood tests for detect-
ing pregnancy produce a result from
9每12 days after conception.
PREGNANCY, MULTIPLEPREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME
P
PREGNANCY TEST
NEGATIVE RESULT
POSITIVE RESULT
HOMEPREGNANCYTEST
Result
window
Urine
sample
Result
window
Indicator
showing
that test
has
worked
Band
indicator
showing
presence
of HCG
Chemically
treated test
stick
premature ejaculation See  ejacula-
tion, disorders of.
prematurity Birth of a baby before 37
weeks＊  gestation. The premature infant
may not be sufficiently developed to
cope with independent life and needs
special care.About 5每10 per cent of
babies are born prematurely.
Some 40 per cent of premature deliv-
eries occur for no known reason. The
remainder are due to conditions such
as pre-eclampsia, hypertension, diabetes
mellitus, long-standing kidney disease,
and heart disease. Other causes are
antepartum haemorrhage, intrauterine
infection, or premature rupture of mem-
branes. A common cause is multiple
pregnancy (see pregnancy, multiple).
A premature infant is smaller than a
full-term baby, lacks subcutaneous fat,
is covered with downy hair (lanugo),
and has very thin skin. The baby＊s inter-
nal organs are also immature. The
major complication is respiratory dis-
tress syndrome. There is increased risk
of brain haemorrhage,  jaundice, and
hypoglycaemia. The baby has a limited
ability to suck and maintain body tem-
perature, and is prone to infection. The
earlier a baby is born, the more likely it
is to have such problems.
Premature infants are usually nursed
in a special baby unit that provides
intensive care. The baby is placed in an
incubator, and may have artificial venti-
lation to assist breathing, artificial
feeding through a stomach tube or into
a vein, and treatment with  antibiotic
drugs and iron and vitamin supplements.
With modern techniques, some infants
survive even if they are born as early as
24 weeks＊ gestation.
premedication The term applied to
drugs given, often by injection, 1每2
hours before an operation to prepare a
person for surgery. Premedication usu-
ally contains a opioid  analgesic drug
and often an anticholinergic drug. 
premenstrual syndrome The com-
bination of physical and emotional
symptoms that occurs in many women
in the week or so before menstruation.
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) may be
so severe that work and social relation-
ships are seriously disrupted. 463
Theories for the cause of PMS include
hormonal changes and vitamin or min-
eral deficiencies, but none have been
confirmed. The most common emotional
symptoms are irritability, tension, depres-
sion, and fatigue. Physical symptoms
include breast tenderness, fluid reten-
tion, headache, backache, and lower
abdominal pain.
No single treatment has proved com-
pletely successful. Treatments to relieve
specific symptoms include diuretic drugs,
dietary changes, and relaxation tech-
niques. Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) or even-
ingprimrose oil may help some women.
Oral contraceptives can relieve symptoms
by suppressing the normal menstrual
cycle. Progesterone supplements are
widely used but not always effective.
premenstrual tension See  premen-
strual syndrome.
premolar One of 8 permanent grinding
teeth, 2 in the upper and 2 in the lower
jaw on each side of the mouth, located
between the canines and molars. (See
also permanent teeth; eruption of teeth.)
prenatal The period of pregnancy
before childbirth.
prepuce See foreskin.
presbyacusis The progressive loss of
hearing that occurs with age. Presbyacu-
sis is a form of sensorineural deafness,
which makes sounds less clear and tones
less audible. People with the condition
often find it difficult to understand
speech and cannot hear well when there
is background noise. Presbyacusis may
be exacerbated by exposure to high
noise levels, diminished blood supply
to the inner ear due to  atherosclerosis,
and damage to the inner ear from drugs
such as aminoglycosidedrugs. Hearing-
aids help most people.
presbyopia The progressive loss of the
power of adjusting the eye (see accom-
modation) for near vision. The focusing
power of the eyes weakens with age.
Presbyopia is usually noticed around
age 45 when the eyes cannot accommo-
date to read small print at a normal
distance. Reading  glasses with convex
lenses are used to correct presbyopia.
prescribed diseases A group of in-
dustrial diseases that give sufferers
legal entitlement to financial benefit. A
claimant has to have worked in an occu-
pation recognized to increase the risk of
developing a particular disease. Exam-
ples include conditions due to physical
agents (such as occupational deafness),
biological agents (for example, anthrax),
or chemical agents (such as  lead poison-
ing);  pneumoconiosis; and  byssinosis.
(See also  notifiable diseases;  occupa-
tional disease and injury.) 
prescription An instruction written by
a doctor that directs a pharmacist to
dispense a particular drug in a specific
dose. A prescription details how often
the drug must be taken, how much is to
be dispensed, and other relevant facts. 
prescription-only medicine Drugs and
medicines that are not available over the
counter and can only be obtained by
prescription. Prescription-only medicines
are those whose safe use is difficult to
ensure without medical supervision.
preservative A substance that inhibits
growth of bacteria, yeasts, and moulds
and so protects foods from putrefying
and fermenting. Examples include sul-
phur dioxide, benzoic acid, salt, sugar,
and nitrites. (See also foodadditives.) 
pressure points Places on the body
where arteries lie near the surface and
pressure can be applied by hand to
limit severe arterial bleeding (in which
bright red blood is pumped out in regu-
lar spurts with the heartbeat). Major
pressure points of the body include the
brachial pressure point in the middle
part of the upper arm and the carotid
pressure point at the side of the neck,
below the jaw.
pressure sores Ulcers that develop on
the skin of patients who are unconscious
or immobile. They are also knownas
decubitus ulcers or bedsores. Common
sites include the shoulders, elbows,
lower back, hips, buttocks, ankles, and
heels. Pressure sores may develop fol-
lowing  stroke or  spinal injuries that
result in a loss of sensation.  Inconti-
nence, if it results in constantly wet skin,
may also be a contributory factor. Pres-
sure sores start as red, painful areas that
become purple before the skin breaks
down. At this stage, the sores often
become infected and are very slow to
heal. Deep, chronic  ulcers may require
PRESSURE SORES PREMENSTRUAL TENSION
P464
treatment with  antibiotic drugs and, in
some cases, possibly  plasticsurgery.
Good nursing care, including changing
the patient＊s position regularly, skin
care, protection of vulnerable areas,
and use of cushions and special mat-
tresses, should prevent pressure sores
from developing in most cases.
prevalence The total number of cases
of a disease at any one time in a
defined population. Prevalence is often
expressed as the number of cases per
100,000 people. 
preventive dentistry An aspect of den-
tistry concerned with the prevention of
tooth decay and gum disease. It consists
of the encouragement of good  oral
hygiene, fluoride treatment, and scaling.
preventive medicine The branch of
medicine that deals with the prevention
of disease by public health measures,
such as the provision of pure water sup-
plies; by health education; by specific
preventive measures, such as  immu-
nization against infectious diseases; and
by screening programmes to detect dis-
eases before they cause symptoms.
priapism Persistent, painful erection of
the  penis without sexual arousal. Pri-
apism occurs when blood does not
drain from the spongy tissue of the
penis, thus keeping the penis erect. This
may be caused by clotting in the blood
vessels due to a blood disorder or as a
result of treatment for impotence. Urgent
treatment is  needed in order to avoid
permanent damage. The treatment may
involve withdrawal of blood from the
penis with a needle.
pricklyheat An irritating skin rash that
is associated with profuse sweating.
The medical name is miliaria rubra.
Multiple tiny, red, itchy spots cover the
affected areas of skin and are accompa-
nied by prickling sensations. The irri-
tation tends to affect areas where sweat
collects, such as the armpits. The cause
is not fully known, but unevaporated
sweat is an important factor.Sweat
ducts become blocked with debris and
leak sweat into the skin. Frequent cool
showers and sponging of the affected
areas relieve the itching.
primaquine A drug used to treat vivax
and ovale malaria. It is often given after
prophylactic treatment with chloroquine
has failed to prevent infection. 
Adverse effects include nausea, vomit-
ing, and abdominal pain. In people with
G6PD deficiency, primaquine may cause
haemolytic anaemia. 
primary A term applied to a disease
that has originated within the organ or
tissue affected, and is not derived from
any other cause or source. The term pri-
mary is also applied to the 1st of
several diseases to affect a tissue or
organ in turn. Primary is also used to
mean ※of unknown cause§.
primary care Health care provided by
a general practitioner or other health-
care professional who is the 1st contact
for a patient seeking medical treatment.
primary teeth The 1st teeth (also known
as milk teeth), which usually start to
appear at age 6 months and are replaced
by the permanent teeth from about age
6 years. There are 20 primary teeth, 10
in each jaw. (See also  teeth; eruptionof
teeth; teething.)
primidone An anticonvulsant drug used
to treat epilepsy and, occasionally, tremor.
It is usually prescribed with another
anticonvulsant. Adverse effects include
drowsiness, clumsiness, and dizziness.
Prinzmetal＊s angina See variant angina.
prion A tiny, protein-based infectious
particle. Prions transmit diseases, includ-
ing Creutzfeldt每Jakob disease in humans
and  bovine spongiform encephalopathy
(BSE) in cattle. Prions do not contain
nucleic acids and are difficult to des-
troy. As yet, no treatment is available
for prion diseases.
PRK The abbreviation for photorefractive
keratectomy.
probenecid A drug used in the long-
term treatment of gout. Probenecid also
slows the excretion of some  antibiotic
drugs and so is occasionally prescribed
with these drugs to boost their levels
and thus their effects. It may cause nau-
sea and vomiting. Other possible
effects include flushing and dizziness. 
probiotic bacteria Species of microor-
ganisms that inhabit the digestive tract,
guarding it against harmful bacteria,
yeasts, and viruses.
procainamide An  antiarrhythmic drug
that is  used to treat certain types of
PREVALENCE PROCAINAMIDE
Ptachycardia. Procainamide may cause
nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, and,
rarely, confusion. Prolonged treatment
may induce lupuserythematosus.
procaine A local anaesthetic (see  an-
aesthesia, local). 
procarbazine An  anticancer drug used
most often in  Hodgkin＊s disease. Side
effects are typical of anticancer drugs.
prochlorperazine A  phenothiazine-type
antipsychotic drug used to relieve symp-
toms of certain psychiatric disorders,
such as  schizophrenia and mania. It is
also used in small doses as an antiemetic
drug. It may cause involuntary move-
ments of the face and limbs, lethargy,
dry mouth, blurred vision, and dizziness.
procidentia A medical term for severe
prolapse, usually of the uterus.
proctalgia fugax A severe cramping
pain in the rectum unconnected with any
disease. It may be due to muscle spasm.
The pain is of short duration and sub-
sides without treatment.
proctitis Inflammation of the  rectum,
causing soreness and bleeding, some-
times with a mucus and pus discharge.
Proctitis commonly occurs as a feature
of  ulcerative colitis,  Crohn＊s disease, or
dysentery. In cases where inflammation
is confined to the rectum, the cause is
often unknown. In male homosexuals,
proctitis is sometimes due to  gonor-
rhoea or another sexually transmitted
infection. Rare causes include  tubercu-
losis, amoebiasis, and schistosomiasis. 
Diagnosis is made by  proctoscopy. A
biopsy is sometimes needed. Treatment
of the underlying cause usually clears
the problem.  Corticosteroid drugs may
relieve symptoms.
proctoscopy Examination of the  anus
and  rectum with a proctoscope (a rigid
viewing instrument).
procyclidine An  anticholinergic drug
used to treat Parkinson＊s disease  and
minimize the side effects of some anti-
psychotic drugs. Possible adverse effects
include dry mouth and blurred vision.
prodrome An early warning symptom
of illness. 
progeria Premature aging. There are 2
forms of progeria, and both are very rare.
In Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome, the pre-
mature aging starts at about 4 years old,
and many features of old age, including
grey hair, balding, sagging skin, and
atherosclerosis, have developed by age
10每12. Death usually occurs at puberty.
Werner＊s syndrome (adult progeria) starts
in adolescence or early adulthood and
follows the same progression. The cause
of progeria is unknown, although it is
known that the cells in affected people
reproduce far less frequently than those
in healthy people.
progesterone hormone A female sex
hormone essential for the functioning of
the female reproductive system. Proges-
terone is made in the ovaries, and small
amounts are produced by the  adrenal
glands and testes. During the menstrual
cycle, changing progesterone levels
cause thickening of the endometrium
and menstruation. If pregnancy occurs,
progesterone is produced by the  pla-
centa; a fall in its level helps to  initiate
labour. Progesterone also causes
increased fat deposition and increased
sebum production by glands in the skin.
progestogen drugs A group of drugs
similar to progesterone hormone.The
drugs are used in  oral contraceptives,
are prescribed to treat menstrual prob-
lems (see  menstruation, disorders of),
and are included in  hormone replace-
ment therapy (HRT). Progestogen drugs
are also used to treat premenstrual syn-
drome,  endometriosis, and
hypogonadism, and are sometimes used
as  anticancer drugs. Adverse effects
include weight gain, oedema, headache,
dizziness, rash, irregular periods, breast
tenderness, and ovarian cysts.
prognathism Abnormal protrusion of
the lower jaw or both jaws.
prognosis An assessment of the proba-
ble course and outcome of a disease. 
progressive A term used to describe a
condition that becomes more severe
and/or extensive over time.
progressive muscular atrophy A type
of  motor neuron disease in which the
muscles of the hands, arms, and legs
become weak and wasted and twitch
involuntarily. The condition eventually
spreads to other muscles.
proguanil An antimalarial drug used in
the prevention of malaria. Side effects
are rare. Indigestion, nausea, or vomiting
PROGUANIL PROCAINE
P
465466
may occur but usually disappear as
treatment continues.
prolactin A  hormone produced by the
pituitary gland. Prolactin helps to stimu-
late the development of the mammary
glands (see breast), and to initiate and
maintain milk production for  breast-
feeding. (See also prolactinoma.) 
prolactinoma A noncancerous tumour
of the pituitarygland that causes over-
production of prolactin. In women, this
may result in  galactorrhoea,  amenor-
rhoea, or infertility. In men, it may cause
impotence and gynaecomastia. In either
sex, it may cause headaches,  diabetes
insipidus, and, if the tumour presses on
the optic nerves, loss of the outer visual
field. Diagnosis is made from blood tests
and  CT scanning or MRI of the brain.
Treatment may involve removal of the
tumour, radiotherapy, or giving the drug
bromocriptine.
prolapse Displacement of part or all of
an organ or tissue from its normal posi-
tion in the body (see uterus, prolapse of;
disc prolapse).
promazine A phenothiazine-type anti-
psychotic drug used as a sedative drug.
Possible adverse effects include abnor-
mal movements of the face and limbs,
drowsiness, lethargy, dry mouth, consti-
pation, and blurred vision. Long-term
treatment may cause parkinsonism.
promethazine An  antihistamine drug
used to relieve itching in a variety of
skin conditions, such as  eczema. It is
also used as an  antiemetic drug, and
sometimes as a premedication. Possible
adverse effects include dry mouth,
blurred vision, and drowsiness.
pronation The act of turning the body
to a prone (facedown) position, or the
hand to a palm backwards position.
propantheline An  antispasmodic drug
used to treat  irritable bowel syndrome
and forms of urinary incontinence. Pos-
sible adverse effects include dry mouth,
blurred vision, and retention of urine.
prophylactic A drug, procedure, or piece
of equipment used to prevent disease;
also a condom. 
propranolol A  beta-blocker drug used
to treat  hypertension,  angina pectoris,
and cardiac arrhythmias. It may also be
used to reduce the risk of further heart
damage after  myocardial infarction. It
relieves symptoms of  hyperthyroidism
and  anxiety, and can prevent migraine
attacks. Possible adverse effects are
typical of other beta-blocker drugs.
proprietary A term for a drug patented
for production by one company.
proprioception The body＊s internal sys-
tem for collecting information about its
position and the state of contraction of
its muscles. Information from proprio-
ceptors (sensory nerve endings in the
muscles, tendons, joints, and the inner
ear) passes to the spinal cord and the
brain. The information is used to make
adjustments so that posture and bal-
ance are maintained. 
proptosis A term for protrusion. 
propylthiouracil A drug used to treat
hyperthyroidism or to control its symp-
toms before a  thyroidectomy. Possible
adverse effects include itching, head-
ache, rash, joint pain, and decreased
production of white blood cells.
prostaglandin One of a group of  fatty
acids that is made naturally in the body
and acts in a similar way to hormones.
Prostaglandins cause pain and inflam-
mation in damaged tissue, protect the
lining of the stomach and duodenum
against ulceration, lower blood pressure,
and stimulate contractions in labour.
(See also prostaglandin drugs.)
prostaglandin drugs Synthetically pro-
duced  prostaglandins. Dinoprostone is
used with  oxytocin for  induction of
labour. Gemeprost softens and helps to
dilate the cervix prior to inducing an
abortion. Alprostadil is used to treat
newborn infants awaiting surgery for
some congenital heart diseases. 
prostate, cancer of A cancerous growth
in the prostate gland, of unknown cause.
One of the most common cancers in
men, it mainly occurs in elderly men. 
An enlarged prostate (see prostate, en-
larged) may cause symptoms including
difficulty in starting to pass urine, poor
urine flow, and increased frequency of
urination. Urine flow may eventually
cease altogether. When there are no uri-
nary symptoms, the first sign may be
pain in the bones from secondary cancers.
Screening tests detect blood levels of a
protein called prostate specific antigen;
PROLACTIN PROSTATE, CANCER OF
P467
if above a certain level, it may indicate
prostate cancer. Rectal examination allows
a doctor to assess the size and hardness
of the gland. Ultrasound scanning and a
biopsy confirm the diagnosis. Blood tests
and a bone scan (see radionuclide scan-
ning) may also be done. In an elderly man
with a small prostate cancer that has not
spread, no treatment may be recom-
mended. For younger men, prostatectomy
or radiotherapy may be performed. Wide-
spread disease is usually controllable for
some years with orchidectomy or drugs. 
prostatectomy An operation to remove
part or all of the  prostate gland. It is
performed to treat enlargement of the
gland (see prostate, enlarged), cancer of
the prostate (see prostate, cancer of), or
prostatitis.The most common method is
trans-urethral prostatectomy, performed
during cystoscopy. If the prostate gland is
very enlarged, retropubic prostatectomy
may be performed. An incision exposes
the prostate and the tissue is removed.
Prostatectomy may affect potency or sex-
ual sensation, though this is not common.
The operation usually causes sterility.
prostate, enlarged An increase in the
size of the inner zone of the  prostate
gland, also known as benign prostatic
hypertrophy. It is most common in men
over 50. The cause is unknown.The
enlarging prostate compresses and dis-
torts the  urethra, impeding the flow of
urine. Eventually the bladder is unable
to expel all the urine (see  urine reten-
tion) and becomes distended, causing
abdominal swelling. There may also be
incontinence and frequency of urination
(see urination, frequent). 
Prostate enlargement is detected by a
rectal examination. Tests may include a
blood test, ultrasound scanning, urogra-
phy, and a recording of the strength of
urine flow. Mild cases do not require
treatment, but more severe ones usual-
ly require  prostatectomy. Alternatively,
drugtreatment with alpha-blocker drugs
or androgen drugs may be given.
prostate gland A solid, chestnut-
shapedorgan that surrounds the 1st
part of the male urethra, just below the
bladder. It produces secretions that
form part of the seminal fluid during
ejaculation. The ejaculatory ducts from
the seminal vesicles pass through the
prostate gland to enter the urethra.
prostate specific antigen An enzyme,
normally produced by the prostate
gland. If produced in excess, it may
indicate the presence of prostate cancer. 
prostatism Symptoms resulting from
enlargement of the prostate gland (see
prostate, enlarged).
prostatitis Inflammation of the prostate
gland, usually affecting men aged 30每50.
It is often caused by a bacterial infec-
tion that has spread from the urethra. A
urinary catheter increases the risk.Pro-
statitis causes pain when passing urine
and increased frequency of urination; it
sometimes causes fever and a discharge
from the penis. There may be pain in the
lower abdomen, around the rectum,
and in the lower back, and blood in the
urine.Diagnosis is made by  rectal ex-
amination and tests on urine samples
and urethral secretions. Treatment is
with antibiotic drugs. The condition may
be slow to clear up and tends to recur.
prosthesis An artificial replacement for
a missing or diseased part of the body;
for example, artificial limbs (see  limb,
artificial), heart valves (see  heart-valve
surgery), or glass eyes (see eye, artificial).
prosthetics, dental The branch of den-
tistry concerned with the replacement
of missing teeth and their supporting
structures. It includes  dentures, over-
dentures (semipermanent fittings over
existing teeth), crowns (see crown, den-
tal), and bridges (see bridge, dental). 
PROSTHETICS, DENTAL PROSTATECTOMY
P
PROSTATE GLAND
Prostate
gland
Vas deferensSeminal vesicle
Rectum
Urethra
Testis
Penis
Bladder
Seminal
ductprotease inhibitors A type of antiviral
drug used to delay the progression of
HIV infection (see AIDS).
proteins Large molecules consisting of
hundreds or thousands of  amino acids
linked into long chains. Proteins may
also contain sugars (glycoproteins) and
lipids (lipoproteins). There are 2 main
types of proteins. Fibrous proteins are
insoluble and form the structural basis
of many body tissues. Globular proteins
are soluble and include all  enzymes,
many  hormones, and some blood pro-
teins, such as haemoglobin. 
proteinsynthesis The formation of
protein molecules through the joining
of amino acids. 
proteinuria The presence of protein in
the urine. It may result from kidney dis-
orders, including glomerulonephritis and
urinary tract infection. Increased protein
in the urine may also occur because of a
generalized disorder that causes in-
creased protein in the blood. Proteinuria
is diagnosed by urinalysis. 
proton pump inhibitors A type of
ulcer-healing drug that is used to treat
peptic ulcers.
protoplasm A term for the entire con-
tents of a cell.
protozoa The simplest, most primitive
type of animal, consisting of a single
cell. All protozoa are bigger than bacte-
ria but are still microscopic. About 30
types of protozoa
are human parasites,
including those that
are responsible for
malaria, amoebiasis,
giardiasis,  sleeping
sickness,  trichomon-
iasis, toxoplasmosis,
and leishmaniasis.
protriptyline An
antidepressant drug
that is used to treat
depression accomp-
aniedby tiredness
and lethargy. Possi-
ble adverse effects
include palpitations,
anxiety, insomnia,
and a rash that be-
comes worse when
exposed to sunlight.
468
proximal A term describing a part of
the body nearer to a central point of ref-
erence, such as the trunk. 
prurigo Thickening and  itching of the
skin due to repeated scratching. 
pruritus The medical term for itching. 
pruritus ani Itching of the anus. Causes
may include an  anal fissure,  haemor-
rhoids, or threadworm infestation.
PSA An abbreviation for  prostate spe-
cific antigen.
pseud-/pseudo- Prefixes meaning false.
pseudarthrosis A term meaning false
joint, used to describe an operation in
which the ends of the 2 opposing bones
in a joint are removed and a piece of tis-
sue is fixed in the gap as a cushion. 
The term also describes a rare child-
hood condition in which congenital
abnormality of the lower half of the tibia
leads to spontaneous fracture.
pseudocyesis See pregnancy, false.
pseudodementia Severe  depression in
elderly people that mimics  dementia.
Symptoms include intellectual impair-
ment and loss of memory. 
pseudoephedrine A decongestant drug
used to relieve  nasal congestion. High
doses may cause anxiety, nausea, and
dizziness. Occasionally,  hypertension,
headache, and palpitations occur.
pseudoepidemic An outbreak of an ill-
ness in a community or in an institution
that is thought to be due to a form of
hysteria. Typical symptoms are head-
ache and a general feeling of sickness.
pseudogout A form of  arthritis that
results from the deposition of calcium
pyrophosphate crystals in a joint. The
underlying cause is unknown; in rare
cases, it is a complication of  diabetes
mellitus, hyperparathyroidism, and haem-
ochromatosis. Symptoms are similar to
gout. Diagnosis is from a sample of
joint fluid. Treatment is with nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatorydrugs (NSAIDs).
pseudohermaphroditism A  congeni-
tal abnormality in which the external
genitalia resemble those of the oppo-
site sex, but ovarian or testicular tissue
is present as normal. A female pseudo-
hermaphroditemay have an enlarged
clitoris resembling a penis and enlarged
labia resembling a scrotum. A male may
have a very small penis and a divided
PROTEASE INHIBITORSPSEUDOHERMAPHRODITISM
P
Nucleus
Flagellum
TYPICAL PROTOZOAN
PROTOZOA
Cytoplasm
Outer cell
membrane
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Mitochondrion469
scrotum resembling labia. (See also
hermaphroditism, sexdetermination.)
pseudomonas Species of rod-like bac-
teria that live in soil and decomposing
matter. PSEUDOMONA AERUGINOSA is capa-
ble of causing disease in humans and is
present in pus from wounds.
psilocybin An alkaloid present in some
mushrooms. It is a hallucinogenicdrug
with properties similar to those of LSD. 
psittacosis A rare illness resembling
influenza that is caused by the microor-
ganism CHLAMYDIA PSITTACI. The disease
is contracted by inhaling dust contain-
ing the droppings of infected birds, such
as pigeons or poultry. Most cases occur
among poultry farmers, pigeon owners,
and people working in pet shops.Com-
mon symptoms are  severe  headache,
fever,  and cough, developing a weekor
more after infection. Other symptoms
may include muscle pains, sore throat,
nosebleed, lethargy, depression, and, in
some cases, breathing difficulty.
A diagnosis is made by finding  anti-
bodies against CHLAMYDIA PSITTACI in the
blood. Treatment is with  tetracycline
antibiotic drugs. With no treatment,
death may result.
psoas muscle A muscle that bends the
hip upwards towards the chest. There are
2parts: psoas major and psoas minor.
Psoas major acts to flex the hip and
rotate the thigh inwards. Psoas minor
bends the spine down to the pelvis.
psoralen drugs Drugs containing chem-
icals called psoralens, which occur in
some plants and are present in some
perfumes. When absorbed into the skin,
psoralens react with  ultravioletlight to
cause skin darkening or inflammation.
Psoralen drugs may be used in conjunc-
tion with ultraviolet light (a combination
called PUVA) to treat psoriasis and viti-
ligo. Overexposure to ultraviolet light
during treatment, or to too high a dose
of a psoralen drug, may cause redness
and blistering of the skin. Psoralens in
perfumes may cause photosensitivity. 
psoriasis A common skin disease char-
acterized by thickened patches of red,
inflamed skin, often covered by silvery
scales. It usually appears between ages
10 and 30, tends to run in families, and
affects men and women equally. 
The exact cause of psoriasis is un-
known. New skin cells are made about
10 times faster than normal. The excess
cells accumulate, forming thickened
patches covered with dead, flaking skin.
Sometimes, there is also a painful
swelling and stiffness of the joints (see
arthritis). Psoriasis tends to recur in
attacks, which may be triggered by fac-
tors such as emotional stress, skin
damage, and physical illness. 
There are different forms of the disor-
der. The most common is discoid, or
plaque, psoriasis, in which patches
appear on the trunk, limbs, and scalp.
Guttate psoriasis occurs most often in
children, and consists of many small
patches that develop over a wide area
of skin. Pustular psoriasis is character-
ized by small pustules.
In most cases, the condition can be
improved with topical treatments, such
as those containing corticosteroid drugs
and coal tar. Other treatments include
dithranol ointment,  PUVA, and drugs
such as methotrexate. Psoriasis is usu-
ally a long-term condition.
psych-A prefix meaning mental pro-
cesses or activities, as in psychology.
psyche A term meaning mind. (See also
psychoanalytic theory.) 
psychiatry The branch of medicine
concerned with the study, prevention,
and treatment of mental illness and
emotional and behavioural problems.
Psychiatrists usually conduct exami-
nations of physical and mental state,
PSYCHIATRY PSEUDOMONAS
P
PSORIASIS
Thickened,
inflamed skin
DISCOID PSORIASIS470
and trace the patient＊s personal and
family history. Treatment may include
medication,  counselling,  psychotherapy,
psychoanalysis, or behaviour therapy.
psychoanalysis A treatment based on
psychoanalytic theory that can help peo-
ple who have  neuroses and  personality
disorders. A modified approach may also
be used to treat  psychosis. Psychoan-
alysis aims to help the patient to
understand his or her emotional devel-
opment and to make adjustments in
particular situations. Interpretation of
the patient＊s dreams is another aspect
of the treatment (see dreamanalysis). 
psychoanalytic theory A system of
ideas developed by Sigmund Freud that
explains personality and behaviour in
terms of unconscious wishes and con-
flicts. The main emphasis was on
sexuality. Freud believed that a child
passes through 3 stages in the first 18
months of life: oral, anal, and genital.
After this, the child develops a sexual
attraction to the parent of the opposite
sex and wants to eliminate the other
parent (Oedipus complex). Sexual feel-
ings become latent around age 5 but
reemerge at puberty. Psychological prob-
lems may develop if  fixation occurs at a
primitive stage. Modern psychoanalysis
has progressed from these ideas and is
generally based on the observation that
most emotional problems are caused
by childhood experiences. Psychoanaly-
sis attempts to free the individual from
the past, helping him or her to become
a real person in the present. Psychoana-
lytic theory is decreasing in influence. 
psychodrama An aid to psychotherapy
in which the patient acts out certain
roles or incidents. Psychodrama is often
carried out with a partner or in a group;
music, dance, and mime are often used. 
psychogenic A term for a symptom or
disorder that is caused by psychological
or emotional problems. 
psychology The scientific study of men-
tal processes. Psychology deals with all
internal aspects of the mind, such as
memory, feelings,  thought, and percep-
tion, as well as external manifestations,
such as speech and behaviour. Psychol-
ogy is also concerned with  intelligence,
learning, and personality development. 
psychometry The measurement of psy-
chological functions using  intelligence
tests, personalitytests, and tests for spe-
cific aptitudes, such as memory, logic,
concentration, and speed of response.
psychoneurosis A term used inter-
changeably with neurosis. 
psychopathology The study of abnor-
mal mental processes. There are 2 main
approaches: the descriptive, whichaims
to record symptoms that make up a
diagnosis of mental illness; and the
psychoanalytic, which is concerned with
the unconscious feelings and motives
of the individual.
psychopathy An outdated term for an
antisocial personality disorder. 
psychopharmacology The study of
drugs that affect mental states, such as
antipsychotic drugs, antidepressant drugs,
and anti-anxiety drugs. 
psychosexual disorders A range of
disorders that are related to sexual func-
tion. Psychosexual disorders include
transsexualism,  psychosexualdysfunc-
tion, and sexual deviation.
psychosexual dysfunction A disorder
in which there is interference with the
sexual response for no physical cause. 
psychosis A severe mental disorder in
which the individual loses contact with
reality. Three main categories of psy-
chosis are recognized:  schizophrenia,
manic每depressiveillness, and organic
brain syndrome (see  brain syndrome,
organic). The main feature of psychotic
illnesses is that they cause a person to
have a distorted view of life. 
Symptoms include  delusions,  halluci-
nations, thoughtdisorders, loss of affect,
mania, and  depression. The cause is
most likely to be a disorder of brain
function.  Antipsychotic drugs are usu-
ally effective in controlling symptoms.
Long-term treatment,  rehabilitation, and
support are often needed. 
psychosomatic A term that describes
physical disorders that seem to have
been caused, or made worse, by psycho-
logical factors. Common examples of
conditions that may be psychosomatic
are headache, breathlessness, nausea,
asthma,  irritable bowel syndrome, peptic
ulcer, and types of  eczema.(See also
somatization disorder.) 
PSYCHOANALYSIS PSYCHOSOMATIC
P471
psychosurgery Any operation on the
brain that is carried out as a treatment
for serious mental illness. It is per-
formed only as a last resort. Prefrontal
lobotomy has now been largely replaced
by types of stereotaxicsurgery.
psychotherapy Treatment of mental
and emotional problems by psycho-
logical methods. Patients talk to a ther-
apist about their symptoms and
problems, with the aim of learning
about themselves, developing insights
into relationships, and changing behav-
iour patterns.
psychotropic drugs Drugs that have
an effect on the mind, including  hallu-
cinogenicdrugs,  sedativedrugs,  sleeping
drugs,  tranquillizerdrugs, and  anti-
psychoticdrugs.
pterygium A wing-shaped thickening of
the conjunctiva that extends from either
side of the eye towards the centre. Ptery-
gium is attributed to prolonged exposure
to bright sunlight and is common in
tropical areas. It is surgically removed if
it threatens vision or causes discomfort. 
ptosis Drooping of the upper eyelid. The
condition may be  congenital, occur
spontaneously, or be due to injury or
disease, such as myastheniagravis. Pto-
sis is usually due to a weakness of the
levator muscle of the upper eyelid or to
interference with the nerve supply to
the muscle. Severe congenital ptosis is
corrected surgically to avoid the devel-
opment of amblyopia.
ptyalism See salivation, excessive.
puberty The period when  secondary
sexual  characteristics develop and the
sexual organs mature. Puberty usually
occurs between the ages of 10 and 15.
(See also precocious puberty.)
pubes The pubic hair or the area of the
body covered by this hair.
pubic bone The front part of the fused
bones that form the pelvis.
pubic lice Small, wingless insects (PHTHI-
RUS PUBIS) that live in the pubic hair and
feed on blood. Also called crab lice or
crabs, they are usually spread by sexual
contact. A louse has a flattened body,
up to 2 mm across. Female lice lay eggs
(nits) on the hair, where they hatch
about 8 days later. On men, the lice may
also be found in hair around the anus,
on the legs, on the trunk, and even in
facial hair. The bites sometimes cause
itching. Children can become infested
by transmission from parents, and the
lice may live on the eyelids. An insecti-
cide lotion kills the lice and eggs.
Public health A branch of medicine
concerned with prevention of disease
through health education, provision of
clean water supplies, sewage disposal,
safer working conditions, infection con-
trol methods, immunizations, and the
care of pregnant women and young chil-
dren. Public health functions are covered
by many people and agencies, such as
Environmental Health Officers, Medical
Officers of Environmental Health, and
the Public Health Laboratory Service.
pudenda A term that refers to the exter-
nal genitalia.
pudendal block A type of  nerve block
used to provide pain relief for a forceps
delivery. A local anaesthetic (see anaes-
thesia,  local) is injected into either side
of the vagina near the pudendal nerve.
puerperal sepsis An infection that origi-
nates in the genital tract within 10 days
after childbirth, miscarriage, or abortion.
Once a common cause of death, it is
now easily treated with antibiotic drugs.
puerperium The period of time after
childbirth during which the woman＊s
uterus and genitals return to their pre-
pregnancy state.
pulmonary Relating to the lungs. 
pulmonary disease, chronic obstruc-
tive A combination of chronic bronchitis
and emphysema, in which there is per-
sistent disruption of air flow into or out
of the lungs. Patients are sometimes
described as either pink puffersor  blue
bloaters, depending on their condition.
Pink puffers maintain adequate oxygen
in their bloodstream through an increase
in their breathing rate, and remain
※pink§ despite damage to the lungs. How-
ever, they suffer from almost constant
shortness of breath. Blue bloaters are
cyanotic (have a bluish discoloration of
the skin and mucous membranes) be-
cause of obesity, and sometimes oedema,
mainly due to heart failure resulting
from the lung damage.
pulmonary embolism Obstruction of
the pulmonary artery or one of its
PULMONARY EMBOLISM PSYCHOSURGERY
P472
branches in the lung by an  embolus,
usually after a deep vein thrombosis
(see  thrombosis, deep vein). If the em-
bolus is large enough to block the main
pulmonary artery, or if there are many
clots, the condition is life-threatening.
Pulmonary embolism is more likely
after recent surgery, pregnancy, and
immobility. A massive embolus can
cause sudden death. Smaller emboli
may cause severe shortness of breath,
rapid pulse, dizziness, chest pain made
worse by breathing, and coughing up of
blood. Tiny emboli may produce no
symptoms, but, if recurrent, may even-
tually lead to pulmonary hypertension. 
A diagnosis may be made by a  chest
X-ray,  radionuclide scanning, and  pul-
monary angiography. An  ECG and
venography may also be performed.
Treatment depends on the size and
severity of the embolus. A small one
gradually dissolves and  thrombolytic
drugs may be given to hasten this pro-
cess.  Anticoagulantdrugs are given to
reduce the chance of more clots. Surgery
may be needed to remove larger clots. 
pulmonary fibrosis Scarring and thick-
ening of lung tissue, usually as a result
of previous lung inflammation. It may
be confined to an area of the lung affec-
ted by a condition such as  pneumonia
or tuberculosis, or it may be widespread
through the lungs (see  fibrosing alveoli-
tis). Shortness of breath is a common
symptom. Diagnosis is confirmed by
chest X-ray. Treatment depends on the
cause, but in most cases the fibrosis is
irreversible and treatment aims to pre-
vent the condition from progressing.
pulmonary function tests A group of
procedures used to evaluate lung func-
tion, to confirm the presence of some
lung disorders, and to ensure that
planned surgery on the lungs will not dis-
able the patient. The tests include
spirometry, measurement of lung vol-
ume, assessment of the degree of
bronchospasm with a  peak-flow meter,
and a test of bloodgases. 
pulmonary hypertension A disorder
in which the blood pressure in the arter-
ies  supplying the lungs is abnormally
high. Pulmonary hypertension develops
in response to increased resistance to
blood flow through the lungs. To main-
tain an adequate blood  flow, theright
side of the heart must contract more
vigorously than before. Right-sided heart
failure may later develop. 
Causes of pulmonary hypertension may
include chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (see pulmonary disease, chronic
obstructive), a pulmonary embolism, pul-
monary fibrosis, and some congenital
heart diseases (see  heart disease, con-
genital), but it can also develop without
an obvious cause. Symptoms, which
include enlarged veins in the neck,
enlargement of the liver, and general-
ized  oedema, only develop when heart
failure occurs. Treatment is aimed at the
underlying disorder (if known) and the
relief of the heart failure. Diureticdrugs
and oxygentherapy may be given.
pulmonary incompetence A rare de-
fect of the pulmonary valve at the exit of
the heart＊s right ventricle. The valve fails
to close properly, allowing blood to leak
back into the heart. The cause is usually
rheumatic fever,  endocarditis, or severe
pulmonary hypertension. 
pulmonary oedema Accumulation of
fluid in the lungs, usually due to left-
sided heart failure. It may also be due to
chest infection, inhalation of irritant
gases, or to any of the causes of gener-
alized  oedema. The main symptom is
breathlessness, which is usually worse
when lying flat and may disturb sleep.
There may be a cough, producing frothy,
sometimes pink, sputum. Breathing may
sound bubbly or wheezy. 
A diagnosis is made by a  physical
examination and by a chestX-ray. Treat-
mentmay include  morphine,  diuretic
drugs, aminophylline, and oxygen therapy;
artificial ventilation may also be given. 
pulmonary stenosis A heart condition
in which the outflow of blood from the
right ventricle is obstructed, causing the
heart to work harder to pump blood to
the lungs. The obstruction may be
caused by narrowing of the pulmonary
valve at the exit of the ventricle; by nar-
rowing of the pulmonary artery, which
carries blood to the lungs; or by narrow-
ing of the upper part of the ventricle. 
Pulmonary stenosis is usually  congeni-
tal, and may occur alone or with a set of
PULMONARY FIBROSISPULMONARY STENOSIS
P473
heart defects called the tetralogy of Fal-
lot. Rarely, the stenosis develops later
in life, after  rheumaticfever, and may
cause symptoms of heart failure. 
Diagnosis is made by a  chest X-ray,
ECG,  echocardiography, and Doppler
ultrasound scanning. A balloon catheter
may relieve the narrowing. Otherwise,
heart-valve surgery or other types of
open heart surgery are often successful.
pulp, dental The soft tissue containing
blood vessels and nerves in the middle
of each tooth (see teeth). 
pulpectomy The removal of the tooth
pulp. It is part of root-canal treatment.
pulpotomy Removal of the coronal part
of the  pulp of a tooth after it has
become inflamed, usually by infection.
Infection is most often due to extensive
tooth decay (see caries, dental) or dental
fractures (see  fracture, dental). Pulpoto-
myprevents further degeneration of the
pulp. If treatment is unsuccessful, root-
canal treatment may be required.
pulse The rhythmic expansion and con-
traction of an artery as blood is forced
through it, pumped by the heart.
pump, infusion A machine that is used
for the administration of a continuous,
controlled amount of a drug or other
fluid. The fluid is delivered through a
needle that is inserted into a vein or
under the skin. 
pump, insulin A type of infusion pump
(see pump, infusion) used to administer
a continuous dose of insulin to some
patients with diabetes mellitus. The rate
of flow is adjusted so that the level of
blood glucose (sugar) is constant.
punch-drunk A condition that is char-
acterized by slurred speech, impaired
concentration, and slowed thought pro-
cesses. It is caused by brain damage
from several episodes of brief loss of
consciousness due to head injury. 
pupil The circular opening in the centre
of the  iris. In bright conditions, the
pupil constricts; in dim light, it dilates. 
purgative A term for a laxativedrug.
purine Any of a group of nitrogen-
containing compounds synthesized in
the body or produced by the digestion of
certain proteins. Increased levels of
purine can cause hyperuricaemia, which
may lead to gout. Foods that have a high
purine content include sardines, liver,
kidneys, pulses, and poultry. 
purpura Any of a group of disorders
characterized by purplish or reddish-
brown areas or spots of discoloration,
caused by bleeding within skin or mu-
cous membranes. Purpura also refers to
the discoloured areas themselves.
There are many different types and
causes of purpura. Common (senile)
purpura mostly affects middle-aged or
elderly women. Large discoloured areas,
caused by thinning of the tissues sup-
porting blood vessels under the skin,
appear on the thighs or the back of the
hands and forearms. Henoch每Sch?nlein
purpura is caused by inflammation of
blood vessels beneath the skin. Purpura
can also occur as a result of thrombocy-
topenia. In addition, it can be
associated with  septicaemia and can be
seen with meningitis (see glass test).
purulent A term that means containing,
producing, or consisting of pus.
pus A pale yellow or green, creamy fluid
found at the site of bacterial infection.
Pus is composed of millions of dead
white blood cells, partly digested tissue,
dead and living bacteria, and other sub-
stances. A collection of pus within solid
tissue is called an abscess.
pustule A small  skin blister that con-
tains pus. 
PUVA A type of  phototherapy used to
treat certain skin conditions, especially
psoriasis. PUVA combines a  psoralen
drug and a controlled dose of long-
wavelength ultravioletlight. 
pyelitis See pyelonephritis.
pyelography See urography.
pyelolithotomy An operation performed
to remove a kidney stone (see calculus,
urinary tract). Pyelolithotomy has been
largely replaced by other procedures,
such as lithotripsy, which uses ultrason-
ic waves to break up the stones.
pyelonephritis Inflammation of the kid-
ney, usually as a result of a bacterial
infection. Pyelonephritis is more com-
monin women and is more likely to
occur during pregnancy. Symptoms of
pyelonephritis include a high fever,
chills, and back pain.  Septicaemia is a
possible complication. Pyelonephritis is
treated with antibioticdrugs.
PYELONEPHRITIS PULP, DENTAL
Ppyloric sphincter The valve at the base
of the stomach that controls movement
of food into the duodenum.
pyloric stenosis Narrowing of the pyl-
orus (the lower outlet from the stomach),
which obstructs the passage of food
into the  duodenum. Pyloric stenosis
occurs in babies due to thickening of the
pyloric  muscle, and in adults due to
scarring from a pepticulcer or  stomach
cancer. Babies start projectile vomiting
(profuse vomiting in which the stomach
contents may be ejected several feet) 2每5
weeks after birth. Ultrasound scanning is
needed to confirm the diagnosis. In
adults, diagnosis may be made by a bar-
ium X-ray examination and gastroscopy.
In infants, surgical treatment involves
making an incision along the thickened
muscle. In adults, surgery is carried out
to correct the underlying cause. 
pyloroplasty An operation in which the
pylorus (the outlet from the stomach) is
widened to allow free passage of food
into the intestine. Pyloroplasty may be
performed as part of the surgery for a
pepticulcer, or to prevent tightening of
the pyloric muscles after vagotomy.
pyo- A prefix that denotes a relationship 
to pus. The prefix py- is also used. 
pyoderma gangrenosum A rare con-
dition characterized by ulcers, usually
on the legs, that turn into hard, painful
PYLORIC SPHINCTER areas surrounded by discoloured skin.
Pyoderma gangrenosum occurs as a
rare complication in ulcerativecolitis.
pyogenic granuloma A common, non-
cancerous skin tumour that develops on
exposed areas after minor injury. It can
be removed surgically, by electrocautery,
or by cryosurgery. 
pyrazinamide A drug sometimes used
to treat  tuberculosis. Possible adverse
effects are nausea, joint pains,  gout,
and liver damage. 
pyrexia A medical term for fever.
pyrexia of uncertain origin Persis-
tent fever with no apparent cause. The
cause is usually an illness that is diffi-
cult to diagnose or a common disease
that presents in an unusual way. These
illnesses include various viral infec-
tions;  tuberculosis; cancer, particularly
lymphoma; and  collagen diseases, such
as  systemic lupus erythematosus and
temporal arteritis. Another possible cause
is a drug reaction.
pyridoxine Vitamin B6 (see  vitaminB
complex). Dietary deficiency of this vita-
min is very rare but can be induced by 
some drugs. Pyridoxine (50 to 100 mg
per day) is sometimes used to treat pre-
menstrualsyndrome. 
pyrimethamine A drug that is used in
combination with other drugs to treat
resistant malaria.
pyrogen A substance that produces
fever. The term is usually applied to
proteins released by white blood cells in
response to infections. The word is also
sometimes used to refer to chemicals
released by microorganisms.
pyromania A persistent impulse to
start fires. The disorder is more often
diagnosed in males, and may be associ-
ated with a low IQ, alcohol abuse, and a
psychosexualdisorder.
pyuria The presence of white blood cells
in the  urine, indicating infection of a
kidney or  urinarytractinfection and
inflammation.
474
PYLORIC SPHINCTER PYURIA
P
LOCATION
STRUCTURE
OF SPHINCTER
Duodenum
Stomach
Oesophagus
Pyloric sphincter
Stomach
Stomach
Duodenum475
QALY A quality adjusted life year. QALY
is used by health economists to com-
pare costs and outcomes of treatment
for various diseases. Each year of life
saved or prolonged is adjusted by a fac-
tor, Q, which takes account of how close
to normal is the individual＊s lifestyle
before and after treatment.
Q fever An uncommon illness causing
symptoms similar to  influenza. Q fever
occurs throughout the world. It is caused
by the  rickettsia COXIELLI BURNETTI, and
may be contracted by inhaling dust con-
taminated with faeces, urine, or birth
products from infected animals. Rarely,
it may be spread by tick bites.
Symptoms develop with sudden onset
about 20 days after infection, and include
a high fever, severe headache, muscle
and chest pains, and a cough. A form of
pneumonia then occurs. In some cases
hepatitis or  endocarditis  may develop.
Less than 1 per cent of cases are fatal.
After diagnosis is confirmed by a
blood test, treatment is with  antibiotic
drugs. There is an effective vaccine.
quackery A false claim to have the abil-
ity to diagnose and treat disease.
quadrantectomy  A surgical procedure
that involves the removal of tissue in
one quadrant of a breast in order to
treat  breast cancer. (See also  lumpec-
tomy; mastectomy.)
quadriceps muscle A muscle with 4 dis-
tinct parts that is located at the front of
the thigh and straightens the knee. The
most common disorder of the quadriceps
is a haematoma caused by a direct blow. 
quadriparesis Weakness of the mus-
cles in all 4 limbs and the trunk. (See
also quadriplegia.)
quadriplegia Paralysis of all 4 limbs and
the trunk. (See also paraplegia.) 
quarantine The isolation of a person or
animal recently exposed to a serious in-
fectious disease. The aim is to prevent
the spread of a disease by infected, but
symptomless, people or animals.
Quarantine procedures are now less
commonly necessary due to the reduced
incidence of most serious infectious
diseases and the availability of vaccina-
tions for many of them.
quickening The first fetal movements
felt by a pregnant woman, usually after
about 18 weeks＊ gestation.
quinine The oldest drug treatment for
malaria. Quinine is now used mainly to
treat strains of malaria that are resis-
tant to other antimalarial drugs. Large
doses are needed, and there is a high
risk of adverse effects, including head-
ache, nausea, hearing loss, ringing in
the ears, and blurred vision.
Quinine is commonly prescribed in
low doses to help prevent leg cramps at
night; adverse effects are rare.
quinolone drugs A group of  antibiotic
drugs, often called antibacterials, that
are used to treat bacterial infections.
Quinolone drugs are derived from
chemicals, rather than living organisms.
Examples include norfloxacin, ciproflox-
acin, and ofloxacin.
Quinolones are used in the treatment
of a wide range of conditions, including
urinary tract infections, acute diarrhoeal
diseases (such as that caused by  sal-
monella infections), and enteric fever.
Their absorption is reduced by antacids
containing magnesium and aluminium.
Quinolones should be used with cau-
tion in patients with  epilepsy, during
pregnancy and breast-feeding, and in
children and adolescents. Side effects
include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea,
headache, sleep disorders, dizziness,
rash, and blood disorders.
quinsy An abscess in the soft tissue
around the tonsils, which is also known
as a peritonsillar abscess.
QUINSY QALY
Q
Qradiation The emission of energy (as
electromagnetic waves) or matter (as par-
ticles) from unstable atoms, which turns
them into a more stable form. Some
types of radiation are harmful to life;
other types are essential (for example,
light and heat energy radiated from the
sun). Even harmful radiation may be
used for beneficial purposes; for exam-
ple, in treatment by radiotherapy, the
biologically-damaging effects of radia-
tion are used to destroy cancerous cells. 
Four significant types of harmful radia-
tionare gamma radiation, X-rays, alpha
particles, and beta particles. Gamma
radiation and X-rays are types of elec-
tromagnetic waves, and are similar to
more energetic forms of light. All 4
types cause damage by ionization 每 the
waves or particles knock out electrons
from atoms in the matter that they pass
through, turning them into highly reac-
tive ions. In the case of living tissue, the
ions formed cause biological damage. 
Radioactive substances that emit any
of these types of radiation constitute a
health hazard. However, alpha particles
cannot penetrate the skin, so sources of
alpha radiation are only dangerous if
ingested or inhaled. Gamma radiation
can travel large distances through many
substances, and even distant gamma
sources can pose a risk to humans. 
Most sources of radiation are natural.
Natural sources of ionizing radiation
include cosmic rays from space, and
radioactive minerals. In some areas, the
gas radon, found in soil, rocks, or build-
ing materials, is a major source. Artificial
sources of ionizing radiation include X-
ray machines, radioactive isotopes used
in diagnosis and treatment (see  radio-
nuclide scanning), and nuclear reactors. 
Less energetic types of radiation, such
as ultraviolet light, may also cause biolog-
ical damage by mechanisms other than
ionization. Ultraviolet radiation from the
sun does not penetrate the body deeply,
but can damage genetic material in
cells and may lead to skin cancer.
Other types of nonionizing radiation to
which people are subjected are  ultra-
sound, used in medicine for diagnosis
and treatment, and radio waves that are
generated during MRI. These techniques
476
rabies An acute viral infection of the
nervous system, once known as hydro-
phobia, that primarily affects dogs but
can be  transmitted to humans by a bite
or a lick over broken skin. The virus trav-
els to the brain; once symptoms develop,
rabies is usually fatal.
The average  incubation period is 1每3
months, depending on the site of the
bite. The symptoms are slight fever and
headache, leading to restlessness, hyper-
activity, and, in some cases, strange
behaviour, hallucinations, and paralysis.
The victim develops convulsions, arrhy-
thmias, and paralysis of the respiratory
muscles and is often intensely thirsty,
but drinking induces painful spasms of
the throat. Death follows 10每14 days
after the onset of symptoms.
Following an animal bite,  immuniza-
tion with human rabies immunoglobulin
and a course of rabies vaccine is neces-
sary; this may prevent rabies if given
within 2 days. If symptoms appear, they
are treated with sedative drugs and
analgesic drugs. The main emphasis is on
preventing the disease through quaran-
tine regulations and human and animal
immunization. (See also bites, animal.)
rachitic A term used to describe abnor-
malities associated with rickets or to refer
to people or populations with rickets.
rad A unit of absorbed dose of ionizing
radiation (see  radiation unit), which has
been superseded by the gray (Gy). ※Rad§
stands for radiation absorbed dose.
radial nerve A branch of the  brachial
plexus. The radial nerve, one of the main
nerves of the arm, runs from the shoulder
to the hand. It controls muscles which
straighten the wrist, and conveys sensa-
tion from the back of the forearm; the
thumb, 2nd, and 3rd fingers; and the
base of the thumb. The nerve may be
damaged by a fracture of the  humerus
or by persistent pressure on the armpit.
RABIES RADIATION
R
R477
are not thought to have any adverse
side effects. (See also radiation hazards;
radiation sickness; radiation units.)
radiation hazards Hazards from radia-
tion may arise from external sources of
radiation or from radioactive materials
taken into the body. The effects depend
on the dose, the duration of exposure,
and the organs exposed.
With some forms of radiation, damage
occurs when the radiation dose exceeds
a certain limit, usually 1 sievert (Sv)
(see  radiation unit). This damage may
include radiation  dermatitis,  cataracts,
organ failure (which may occur many
years later), or radiation sickness.
For other types of radiation damage,
the risk that damage will occur increases
with increasing doses of radiation. Can-
cer caused by radiation-induced mutation
is the major example of this type of
damage. Radioactive leaks from nuclear
reactors can cause a rise in mutation
rates, which may lead to an increase in
cancers, such as  leukaemias; to  birth
defects; and to hereditary diseases. Can-
cer usually develops years after exposure.
Radiation damage can be controlled
by limiting exposure. People exposed to
radiation at work have their exposure
closely monitored to ensure that it does
not exceed safe limits. People of repro-
ductive age or younger should have their
reproductive organs shielded when hav-
ing X-rays or radiotherapy.
There is no evidence of radiation haz-
ards with visual display units (VDUs).
radiation sickness The term applied to
the acute effects of ionizing radiation on
the whole, or a major part, of the body
when the dose is greater than 1 gray
(1Gy) of X-rays or gamma rays, or 1
sievert (1 Sv) of other types of radiation.
The effect of radiation depends on the
dose and the exposure time. Total-body
doses of less than 2 Gy are unlikely to
be fatal to a healthy adult. At doses of
1每10 Gy, transient nausea and occa-
sional vomiting may occur, but usually
disappear rapidly and are often fol-
lowed by a 2每3 week period of relative
well-being. By the end of this period, the
effects of radiation damage to  the bone
marrow and immune system begin to
appear, with repeated  infections and
petechiae (pinpoint spots of  bleeding
under the skin). Some people are suc-
cessfully treated with a  bone marrow
transplant or by isolation in a sterile envi-
ronment until the bone marrow recovers.
With a dose of 10每30 Gy there is also
an early onset of nausea and vomiting,
which tends to disappear a few hours
later. However, damage to the gastroin-
testinal tract, which causes severe and
frequently bloody diarrhoea (called the
gastrointestinal syndrome), and over-
whelming infection due to damage to
the  immune system  is likely to result in
death 4每14 days after exposure.
Acute exposures of more  than 30每100
Gy cause the rapid onset of nausea,
vomiting,anxiety, and disorientation.
Within hours, the victim usually dies due
to  nervous  system damage and  oedema
of the brain; these effects are called the
central nervous system syndrome.
radiation unit Several different inter-
nationally agreed units (called SI units)
are used to measure ionizing  radiation.
For example, the roentgen (R) measures
the amount  of radiation in the air, and
the becquerel  is the SI unit of sponta-
neous activity of a radioactive source
such as uranium. For medical purposes,
the most commonly used units are the
gray (Gy) and the sievert (Sv).
The gray is the SI unit of radiation that
is actually absorbed by any tissue or
substance as a result of exposure to
radiation. 1 Gy is  the absorptionof 1
joule of energy (from gamma radiation
or X-rays) per kilogram of irradiatedmat-
ter. The gray supersedes an older unit
called the rad (1 Gy = 100 rads). 
Because some types of radiation affect
biological organisms more than others,
the sievert is used as a measure of the
impact of an absorbed dose. It uses
additional factors, such as the kind of
radiation and its energy, to quantify the
effects on the body of equivalent
amounts of different types of absorbed
energy. The sievert replaces an older
unit, the rem (1 Sv=100 rems).
radical surgery Extensive surgery that
is aimed at eliminating a major disease,
usually  cancer, by removing affected
tissue and surrounding tissue that
might be diseased. 
RADICAL SURGERY RADIATION HAZARDS
R478
radiculopathy Damage to the nerve
roots that enter or leave the spinal cord.
Radiculopathy may be caused by  disc
prolapse, spinal arthritis, diabetes mellitus,
or ingestion of heavy metals such as lead.
The symptoms are severe pain and,
occasionally, loss of feeling in the area
supplied by the affected nerves, and
weakness,  paralysis, and wasting of
muscles supplied by the nerves. If pos-
sible, the underlying cause is treated;
otherwise, symptoms may be relieved
by analgesic drugs, physiotherapy, or, in
some cases, surgery.
radioactivity The emission of alpha
particles, beta particles, and/or gamma
radiation that occurs when the nuclei of
unstable atoms spontaneously disinte-
grate. Many radioactive substances are
naturally occurring 每 for example, ura-
nium ores. (See also radiation.)
radiography The use of radiation, such
as  X-rays, to image parts of the body.
(See also imaging techniques; radiology.)
radioimmunoassay A sensitive labo-
ratory technique that uses radioactive
isotopes to measure the concentration
of proteins such as hormones or anti-
bodies in blood. (See also immunoassay.)
radioisotope scanning See  radionu-
clide scanning.
radiology The medical speciality that
makes use of  X-rays,  ultrasound, MRI,
and radionuclide scanning for investiga-
tion, diagnosis, and treatment. 
Radiological methods provide images
of the body in a noninvasive way so that
exploratory surgery is not needed. The
techniques also enable instruments
(such as needles and  catheters) to be
accurately guided into different parts of
the body for diagnosis and treatment.
This is called interventional radiology. 
radiolucent A term for anything that is
almost transparent to  radiation, espe-
cially to X-rays and gamma radiation. 
radionuclide scanning A diagnostic
technique based on detection of  radia-
tion emitted by radioactive substances
introduced into the body. Substances
are taken up to different degrees by dif-
ferent tissues, allowing specific organs
to be studied. For example, iodine is
taken up mainly by the thyroid gland, so
by ※tagging§ a sample of iodine with a
radioactive marker (radionuclide), the
uptake of iodine can be monitored to
investigate the functioning of the gland.
A radionuclide is swallowed or injec-
ted into the blood and accumulates 
in the target organ. It emits radiation in
the form of gamma radiation, which is
detected by a gamma camera to pro-
duce an image. Cross-sectional images
(※slices§) can be obtained using a com-
puter-controlled gamma camera that
rotates around the patient. This special-
ized form of radionuclide scanning is
known as SPECT (single photon emis-
sion computed tomography). Moving
RADICULOPATHYRADIONUCLIDE SCANNING
R RADIONUCLIDE SCANNING
Gamma camera counterbalance
Adjustable
bed
Radiographer
Monitor
displays
image
Control
panel
Gamma
camera479
images can also
be made using a
computer to record
a series of images.
Radionuclide scan-
ning can detect
some disorders at
an earlier stage
than other imag-
ing techniques
because changes
in the functioning
of an organ often
occur before the
structure of the
organ is affected.
The technique is
also used to de-
tect disorders that
affect only the
function of organs.
Moving images
can provide infor-
mation on  blood
flow,  the movement of the heart walls,
the flow of urine through the kidneys,
and bile flow through the liver.
Radionuclide scanning is a safe pro-
cedure, requiring only minute doses of
radiation that are excreted within
hours. The radionuclides carry virtually
no risk of toxicity or hypersensitivity. 
radiopaque This term describes any-
thing that blocks radiation, especially
X-rays and gamma rays. As many body
tissues are radiolucent, some X-ray imag-
ing procedures require the introduction
of radiopaque substances into the body
to make organs stand out clearly.
radiotherapy Treatment of cancer and,
occasionally, some noncancerous tu-
mours, by  X-rays  or other  radiation.
Radioactive sources produce ionizing
radiation, which destroys or slows down
the development of abnormal cells.
Normal cells suffer little or no long-
term damage, but short-term damage is
a side effect.
Radiotherapy may be used on its own
in an attempt to destroy all the abnormal
cells in various types of cancer, such as
squamous cell carcinoma and Hodgkin＊s
disease. It may also be used with other
cancer treatments. Surgical excision of
a cancerous tumour is often followed by
radiotherapy to destroy any remaining
tumour cells. Radiotherapy may also be
used to relieve the symptoms of a can-
cer that is too advanced to be cured. 
If benefits outweigh risks, radiotherapy
may be used to treat noncancerous dis-
eases; for example, part of an overactive
thyroid gland (see  thyrotoxicosis) may
be destroyed using radioactive iodine.
Radiotherapy is usually performed on
an outpatient basis.  X-rays (or some-
times electrons) produced by a machine
called a linear accelerator are aimed at
the tumour from many directions. This
produces a large enough dose of radia-
tion to destroy the tumour. Alternatively,
a source of radiation, in the form of tiny
pellets, is inserted into the tumour
through a hollow needle (see interstitial
radiotherapy) or into a body cavity (see
intracavitary therapy). Radioactive iodine
used to treat thyrotoxicosis is given in
liquid form and drunk through a straw.
There may be unpleasant side effects,
including fatigue, nausea and vomiting,
and loss of hair from irradiated areas.
Rarely, there may be reddening and
blistering of the skin.
radium A rare, radioactive, metallic ele-
ment that occurs naturally only as
compounds in uranium ores.
RADIOPAQUE
R
RADIOTHERAPY
Linear accelerator
(radiation source)
Control panel
Beam of radiation
Adjustable table
RADIUM
EXTERNAL BEAM RADIOTHERAPY480
radius The shorter
of the 2 long bones
of the forearm; the
other is  the ulna.
The  radius is the
bone on the thumb
side of  the arm. It
articulates with the
humerus at the el-
bow and the carpal
bones at the wrist.
It takes most of the
strain when weight
is placed on the
wrist and is a com-
mon site of fractures
(see  radius, fracture
of; Colles＊ fracture). 
radius, fracture of
A common type of
fracture that may
affect the lower end,
upper end, or shaft
of the radius. Fracture of the radius just
above the wrist (see Colles＊ fracture) is
the most common of all fractures in
people over 40. Fracture of the head of
the radius just below the elbow is one
of the most common fractures in young
adults. Treatment involves immobilizing
the broken bone in a  cast or surgically.
Healing takes approximately 6 weeks.
radon A colourless, odourless, tasteless,
radioactive gaseous element produced
by the radioactive decay of radium. 
randomized controlled trials A form
of  controlled trial that evaluates the
effectiveness of a drug, or other treat-
ment, in which subjects are randomly
allocated to one of the study groups.
This random allocation means individu-
als are equally likely to be selected for
the particular treatment being investiga-
ted or for the control group of the trial.
ranitidine An ulcer-healing drug belong-
ing to the H2-receptor antagonist group.
It is used to prevent and treat  peptic
ulcers and to treat  oesophagitis. Side
effects may include headache, skin rash,
nausea, constipation, and lethargy.
ranula A cyst  in the floor of the mouth,
which produces a translucent bluish
swelling. Ranulas probably arise from
damage to a  salivary gland.  They are
removed surgically.
rape Sexual intercourse with an unwill-
ing partner, which is achieved by the
use or the threat of force or violence.
rash A group of spots or an area of red,
inflamed skin. A rash is usually tempo-
rary and is only rarely a sign of a serious
underlying problem. It may be accom-
panied by itching or fever.
Rashes are classified according to
whether they are localized (affecting a
small area of skin) or generalized (cov-
ering the entire body), and the type of
spots. A bullous rash has large blisters,
a vesicular rash has small blisters, and
a pustular one has pus-filled blisters. A
macular rash consists of spots level
with the surrounding skin and dis-
cernible from it by a difference in colour
or texture. Nodular and papular rashes
are composed of small, raised bumps.
Rashes are the main sign of many
infectious diseases (such as  chicken-
pox), and are a feature of many skin
disorders, such as eczema and psoriasis.
They may also indicate an underlying
medical problem, such as the rashes of
scurvy or pellagra, which are caused by
vitamin deficiency. The rashes of  urti-
caria or contact  dermatitis may be
caused by an allergic reaction. Drug
reactions, particularly to antibiotic drugs,
are a common cause of rashes.
A diagnosis is based on the appear-
ance and distribution of the rash, the
presence of any accompanying symp-
toms, and the possibility of allergy (for
example, to drugs). Any underlying
cause is treated if possible. An itching
rash may be relieved by a lotion, such
as calamine, or an antihistamine drug.
RAST An abbreviation for radioallergo-
sorbent test. RAST is a type of  radio-
immunoassay used to detect antibodies
to specific antigens.
rats, diseases from Rats are rodents
that live close to human habitation.
They damage and contaminate crops
and food stores and can spread disease.
The organisms responsible for plague
and a type of  typhus are transmitted to
humans by the bites of rat fleas.  Lep-
tospirosis is caused by contact with
anything contaminated by rat＊s urine.
Rat-bite fever is a rare infection trans-
mitted directly by a rat bite. There are 2
RADIUS RATS, DISEASES FROM
R
RADIUS
Radius
Carpal
bones
Ulna
Humerus481
types of this infection, caused by differ-
ent bacteria. The symptoms include
inflammation at the site of the bite and
in nearby  lymph nodes and vessels,
bouts of fever, a rash, and, in one type,
painful joint inflammation. Treatment
for both types is with antibiotic drugs.
Rabies virus can be transmitted by the
bites of infected rats. Lassa fever, also a
viral disease, may be contracted from
the urine of rats in West Africa. Rats
also carry the viral infection lympho-
cytic chorio-meningitis, as well as the
bacterial infection tularaemia.
Raynaud＊s disease A disorder of the
blood vessels in which exposure to cold
causes the small arteries supplying the
fingers and toes to contract suddenly.
This cuts off blood flow to the digits,
which become pale. The fingers are
more often affected than the toes. The
cause is unknown, but young women
are most commonly affected .
On exposure to cold, the digits turn
white due to lack of blood. As sluggish
blood flow returns, the digits become
blue; when they are warmed and normal
blood flow returns, they turn red. During
an attack, there is often tingling, numb-
ness, or a burning feeling in the affected
fingers or toes. In rare cases, the artery
walls gradually thicken, permanently
reducing blood flow. Eventually painful
ulceration or even gangrene may devel-
op at the tips of the affected digits.
Diagnosis is made from the patient＊s
history. Treatment involves keeping the
hands and feet as warm as possible.
Vasodilator drugs or  calcium channel
blockers may be helpful in severe cases.
(See also Raynaud＊s phenomenon.)
Raynaud＊sphenomenon A circulatory
disorder affecting the fingers and toes
that shares the mechanism, symptoms,
and signs of  Raynaud＊s disease but re-
sults from a known underlying disorder.
Possible causes include arterial diseases,
such as atherosclerosis; connective tissue
diseases, such as  rheumatoid arthritis;
and various drugs, such as beta-blocker
drugs. The disorder  isan occupational
disorder of people who use pneumatic
drills, chain saws, or vibrating machin-
ery; it is sometimes seen in typists,
pianists, and others whose fingers suffer
repeated trauma. Treatmentis the same
as for Raynaud＊s disease, along with
treatment of the underlying disorder.
reactive arthritis Inflammation of the
joints due to an abnormal immune res-
ponse that occurs after an infection of
the genital tract, such as  chlamydial
infection,or of the intestinal tract, such
as  gastroenteritis. If there is additional
inflammation elsewhere in the body,
such as in the eyes, the condition is
known as Reiter＊s syndrome.
reagent A term for any chemical sub-
stance that takes part in a chemical
reaction. The term usually refers to a
chemical or mixture of chemicals used
in chemical analysis or employed to
detect a biological substance.
reboxetine An antidepressant drug that
blocks the reuptake of  noradrenaline
(norepinephrine) within the nervous
system. Side effects include insomnia,
sweating, and dizziness on standing.
receding chin Underdevelopment of the
lower jaw. The condition can be corrected
by the use of  orthodontic appliances
used in the growth spurt at adolescence
or by cosmetic surgery.
receding gums Withdrawal of the gums
from around the teeth, exposing part of
the roots. The teeth may be sensitive to
hot and cold substances, and the attach-
mentof  the tooth in the socket may
weaken, causing the tooth to become
loose. Severe cases of receding gums
are usually a signs of gum disease (see
periodontitis; gingivitis). 
receptor A general term for any sensory
nerve cell (one that converts stimuli
into nerve impulses). The term is also
used to refer to structures on the sur-
face of a cell that allow chemicals to
bind with the cell. 
recessive A term used in genetics to
describe one of the ways by which a gene
is passed from parent to offspring. Many
characteristics are determined by a sin-
gle pair of genes, 1 of each pair being
inherited from each parent. A recessive
gene is overridden by an equivalent dom-
inant gene. For example, the gene for
blue eye colour is recessive; therefore, if
a child inherits the gene for brown eyes
from 1 parent and the gene for blue
eyes from the other, the ※blue eye§ gene
RECESSIVE RAYNAUD＊S DISEASE
R482
is overridden by the ※brown eye§ gene,
and the child has brown eyes. The child
must inherit the recessive blue eye gene
from both parents in order to have blue
eyes. Many genetic disorders are deter-
mined by a recessive gene. Examples
include  cystic fibrosis and  sickle cell
anaemia. The  child will only have the
disease if he or  she inherits the gene
from both parents.
recombinant DNA A section of  DNA
from an organism that has been artific-
ially spliced into the DNA of another
organism. (See genetic engineering.)
reconstructive surgery See  arterial
reconstructive surgery; plastic surgery.
recovery position The position in
which to place an unconscious, breath-
ing casualty, while waiting for medical
help. The body is placed on its side with
the upper leg bent at a right angle; the
lower leg is kept straight. The lower arm
is bent at a right angle; the upper is
bent with the palm of the hand placed
against the lower cheek to support the
head, which is tilted back to keep the
airway open. Casualties with suspected
spinal injuries should not be placed in
the recovery position.
rectal bleeding The passage of blood
from the rectum or anus. The blood may
be red, dark brown, or black. It may be
mixed with, or on the surface of, faeces or
passed separately, and there may be pain.
Haemorrhoids are the most common
cause of rectal bleeding. Small amounts
of bright red blood appear on the surface
of faeces or on toilet paper. Anal fissure,
anal fistula,  proctitis, or  rectal prolapse
may also cause rectal bleeding.
Cancer of the colon (see  colon, cancer
of) or the rectum (see rectum, cancer of),
or polyps can also cause bleeding. Dis-
orders of the colon such as diverticular
disease may cause dark red faeces. Black
faeces (melaena) may be due to bleed-
ing high in the digestive tract. Bloody
diarrhoea may be due to ulcerative coli-
tis, amoebiasis, or  shigellosis. Diagnosis
may be made from a rectal examination,
from proctoscopy,  sigmoidoscopy,  colon-
oscopy, or a double-contrast  barium
X-ray examination.
rectal examination Examination of the
anus and rectum, performedas part of a
general  physical examination, to assess
symptoms of pain or changes in bowel
habits, and to check for the presence of
tumours of the rectum or prostate gland.
rectal prolapse
Protrusion outside
the anus of the lin-
ing of the  rectum,
usually brought on
by straining to defe-
cate. The  condition
commonly causes
discomfort, mucus
discharge,  and  rec-
tal bleeding.
Rectal prolapse is
usually temporary
in young children
but is often perma-
nent in elderly people. If the prolapse is
large, leakage of faeces may occur.
Treatment is with a fibre-rich diet.
Surgery may also be performed.
rectocele Bulging inwards and down-
wards of the back wall of the vagina as
the rectum pushes against weakened tis-
sues in the vaginal wall. A rectocele is
usually associated with a cystocele or a
prolapsed uterus (see uterus, prolapse of).
There may be no symptoms, or the
rectocele may cause constipation. Pelvic
floor exercises may help. If not, an oper-
ation to tighten the tissues at the back
of the vagina may be recommended.
rectum A short, muscular tube that
forms the lowest part of the large intes-
tine and connects it to the anus.
Rectal disorders are diagnosed by
rectal examination and  proctoscopy or
by sigmoidoscopy.
RECOMBINANT DNA RECTUM
R
RECOVERY POSITION
Victim＊s hand
supporting the head
Leg bent
Head tilted back to
keep airway open483
rectum, cancer of A cancerous tumour
in the  rectum. The cause is unknown,
but dietary factors and genetic factors
are thought to play a part. It is more
common between ages 50 and 70.
Early symptoms are  rectal bleeding
during defecation and diarrhoea or con-
stipation. Later, pain may occur. Left
untreated, the cancer may eventually
cause severe bleeding and pain and
block the intestine. It may also spread
to other organs.
The cancer may be detected by a rectal
examination and confirmed with  proc-
toscopy or sigmoidoscopy and biopsy.
Treatment is usually with surgery. For a
tumour in the upper rectum, the affected
area and the last part of the colon are
removed and the 2 free ends of the
intestine are sewn together. To promote
healing, a temporary colostomy may be
made. For a growth in the lower rectum,
the entire rectum and anus are removed.
Because there is no outlet for faeces, a
permanent colostomy is created.
Radiotherapy and anticancer drugs may
be used in addition to or instead of sur-
gery. Up to 40 per cent of people treated
for rectal cancer live for 10 years or more. 
red-eye Another name for conjunctivitis.
reduction The process of manipulating
a displaced part of the body back into
its original position.
referred pain Pain felt in a part of the
body at some distance from its cause. It
occurs because some remote parts of
the body are served by the same nerve
or group of nerves. Nerve impulses that
reach the brain from one of these areas
may be misinterpreted as coming from
another. A common example of referred
pain is the pain down the left arm
caused by a myocardial infarction.
reflex An action that occurs automati-
cally and predictably in response to a
particular stimulus, independent of the
will of the individual. 
In the simplest reflex, a sensory nerve
cell reacts to a stimulus, such as heat or
pressure, and sends a signal along its
nerve fibre to the  central nervous sys-
tem. There, another nerve cell becomes
stimulated and causes a muscle to con-
tract or a gland to increase its secretory
activity. The passage of the nerve signal
from original sensation to final action is
called a reflex arc.
Reflexes may be inborn or condi-
tioned. Some inborn reflexes occur only
in babies (see  reflex, primitive). Inborn
reflexes include those that control basic
body functions, such as contraction of
the bladder after it has filled beyond a
certain point, and are managed by the
autonomic nervous system. Conditioned
reflexes are acquired through experi-
ence in a process called conditioning. 
Several simple reflexes, such as the
knee-jerk, are tested in a physical exam-
ination. Changes in the reflexes may
indicate damage to the nervous system.
The examination of vital reflexes con-
trolled by the brainstem is the basis for
diagnosing brain death.
reflexology A form of  complementary
medicine in which the practitioner mas-
sages parts of the patient＊s feet in an
attempt to treat disorders affecting
other areas of the body.
reflex, primitive An automatic move-
ment in response to a stimulus that is
present in newborn infants but disap-
pears during the first few months after
birth. Primitive reflexes are believed to
represent actions that were important in
earlier stages of human evolution. They
include the grasp reflex when something
is placed in the hand and the rooting
reflex, which enables a baby to find the
nipple. The rooting reflex can be evoked
by touching the baby＊s cheek with the
fingertip. These reflexes are tested after
birth to give an indication of the condi-
tion of the nervous system. 
REFLEX, PRIMITIVE RECTUM, CANCER OF
R
REFLEX, PRIMITIVE
ROOTING REFLEX
Head turns when
cheek is stroked484
reflux An abnormal backflow of fluid in
a body passage due to failure of the
passage＊s exit to close fully. A common
type of reflux is  regurgitation of acid
fluid from the stomach (see acid reflux). 
refraction The bending of light rays as
they pass from one substance to anoth-
er. It is the mechanism by which images
are focused on the retina in the eye. 
regression A term used in  psychoana-
lytic theory to describe the process of
returning to a childhood level of behavi-
our, such as thumb-sucking.
regurgitation A backflow of fluid. In
medicine, the term is used to describe
the return of swallowed food or drink
from the stomach into the  oesophagus
and mouth. The term is also used to
describe the backflow of blood through
a  heart valve that does not close fully
because of a disorder such as  mitral
incompetence. (See also reflux.)
rehabilitation Treatment aimed at enab-
ling a person to live an independent life
following injury, illness,  alcohol depen-
dence, or  drug dependence. Treatment
may include physiotherapy, occupational
therapy, and psychotherapy.
In a rehabilitation centre, a person＊s
disability or dependence is assessed
and a treatment programme is devel-
oped. Industrial rehabilitation centres
provide job retraining for those who
cannot return to their previous employ-
ment. Drug and alcohol rehabilitation
centres help people through withdrawal
and provide psychological support.
rehydration, oral See rehydration ther-
apy.
rehydration therapy The treatment of
dehydration by administering fluids and
salts by mouth (oral rehydration) or by
intravenous infusion. The amount of fluid
necessary depends on age, weight, and
the degree of dehydration.  Mild dehy-
dration can usually be treated with oral
solutions, which are available as effer-
vescent tablet or powder to be made up
at home. In severe dehydration, or if the
patient cannot take fluids by mouth
because of nausea or vomiting, an intra-
venous infusion of saline and/or glucose
solution may be given in hospital.
reimplantation, dental Replacement of
a tooth in its socket after an accident so
that it can become reattached to sup-
porting tissues. The front teeth are most
commonly involved. The tooth needs to
be reimplanted soon after the accident
and is maintained with a splint (see
splinting, dental) while it heals. Healing
may take several weeks.
Reiter＊s syndrome A condition in which
there is a combination of urethritis,  re-
activearthritis, and  conjunctivitis. There
may also be uveitis. Reiter＊s syndrome is
more common in men. 
The syndrome is caused by an immune
response and usually develops only in
people with a genetic predisposition.
Most patients have the HLA-B27 tissue
type (see  histocompatability antigens).
The syndrome＊s development is induced
by infection: usually nongonococcal ure-
thritis, but sometimes bacillary dysentery.
Reiter＊s syndrome usually starts with a
urethral discharge, which is followed by
conjunctivitis and then arthritis. The
arthritis usually affects 1 or 2 joints
(usually the knee and/or ankle) and is
often associated with fever and malaise.
Attacks can last for several months.
Tendons,  ligaments, and tissue in the
soles of the feet may also become in-
flamed. Skin rashes are common.
Diagnosis is made from the symptoms.
Analgesic drugs and  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs relieve symptoms
but may have to be taken for a long peri-
od. Relapses occur in about 1 in 3 cases.
rejection An immune response aimed at
destroying organisms or substances that
the body＊s immune system recognizes as
foreign. Rejection commonly refers to
the nonacceptance of tissue grafts or
organ transplants. To avoid rejection,
donor tissues are closely matched to
the recipient (see tissue-typing). Immuno-
suppressant drugs,  corticosteroid drugs,
and ciclosporin are given to organ trans-
plant recipients to suppress rejection.
(See also grafting; transplant surgery.)
relapse The recurrence of a disease
after an apparent recovery, or the return
of symptoms after a remission.
relapsing fever An illness caused by
infection with  spirochaetes. Relapsing
fever is transmitted to humans by  ticks
or lice and is characterized by high fever.
It does not occur in the UK.
REFLUX RELAPSING FEVER
R485
A high fever of up to 40∼C suddenly dev-
elops, with shivering, headache, muscle
pains, nausea, and vomiting. The symp-
toms persist for 3每6 days, culminating in
a crisis with a risk of collapse and death.
The person then apparently recovers but
suffers another attack 7每10 days later. If
tick-borne, there may be several  such
relapses, each progressively milder.
The spirochaetes can be seen in a
blood smear, and they can be elimina-
ted with antibiotic drugs.
relationship counselling  Formerly
known as marriage guidance, relation-
ship counselling is a type of professional
therapy for established partners aimed
at resolving the problems within their
relationship. The couple attends regular
sessions together in which the counsellor
promotes communication and attempts
to help resolve differences between the
partners. Relationship counselling is
largely based on the ideas and methods
of  behaviour therapy. If some of the
couple＊s problems are sexual, the coun-
sellor may refer them for sex therapy.
relaxation techniques Methods of con-
sciously releasing muscular tension to
achieve mental calm. They can assist
people with  anxiety symptoms, help to
reduce hypertension, and relieve stress,
and may help pregnant women to cope
with labour pains (see childbirth, natural).
Active relaxation consists of tensing
and relaxing each of the muscles in turn.
Passive relaxation involves clearing the
mind and concentrating on a phrase or
sound. Breathing exercises help to pre-
vent hyperventilation, which often brings
on or worsens anxiety. Traditional con-
centration methods, such as  yoga  and
meditation, employ similar techniques.
releasing factors A group of hormones,
produced by the  hypothalamus in the
brain, that stimulates the release of other
hormones. Luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone is one such releasing factor. 
rem An outdated unit of absorbed radi-
ation dose, now superseded by the
sievert. (See also radiation units.)
remission A temporary disappearance
or reduction in the severity of the symp-
toms of a disease, or the period during
which this occurs.
renal Related to the kidney.
renal biopsy See kidney biopsy.
renal cell carcinoma The most com-
mon type of kidney cancer.
renal colic Spasms of severe pain on one
side of the back, usually caused by a
kidney stone (see calculus, urinary tract)
passing down the ureter. There may also
be nausea, vomiting, sweating, and blood
in the urine. Treatment is usually with
bed rest, plenty of fluids, and injections
of an analgesic drug, such as pethidine. 
renal failure See kidney failure.
renal transplant Another term for kid-
ney transplant.
renal tubular acidosis A condition in
which the kidneys are unable to excrete
normal amounts of acid made by the
body. The blood is more acidic than nor-
mal, and the urine less acidic. Causes
include kidney damage due to disease,
drugs, or a genetic disorder; but in many
cases the cause is unknown. The acidosis
may result in osteomalacia, kidney stones
(see calculus, urinary tract), nephrocalci-
nosis, and hypokalaemia (an abnormally
low level of potassium in the blood).
renin An enzyme involved in the regula-
tion of blood pressure. When the blood
pressure falls, the kidneys release renin,
which changes a substance called angio-
tensinogen into angiotensin I. This is
rapidly converted into angiotensin II,
which acts to increase blood pressure. 
renography A technique that uses a
radioactive substance to measure  kid-
ney function. Renography is quick and
painless and is used when obstruction
of the passage of urine is suspected.
The radioactive substance is injected
into the bloodstream and passes through
the kidneys into the urine.  Radiation
counts are taken continually throughout
the procedure. Normally, the count rises
and then falls as the substance passes
into the bladder. If obstruction is pre-
sent, the substance accumulates in the
kidneys and the count continues to rise.
(See also kidney imaging.)
repaglinide An oral hypoglycaemic drug
used either alone or in combination with
metformin in the treatment of type 2
diabetes mellitus.  Repaglinide stimu-
lates the release of  insulin. Side effects
may include abdominal pain, diarrhoea
or constipation, nausea, and vomiting.
REPAGLINIDE RELATIONSHIP COUNSELLING
Rrepetitive strain injury (RSI) An
overuse injury that affects keyboard
workers and musicians, causing weak-
ness and pain in the wrists and fingers.
reproduction, sexual The process of
producing offspring by the fusion of 2
cells from different individuals; this is
achieved in humans by the fusion of 1
sperm and 1 ovum. This fusion (fertiliza-
tion) is achieved by sexual intercourse or
artificial insemination.
reproductive system, female The fe-
male organs involved in ovulation, sexual
intercourse, nourishing a fertilized ovum
until it has developed into a full-grown
fetus, and childbirth. With the exception
of the vulva, which protects the opening
of the  vagina, these organs lie within
the pelvic cavity.
Ova (eggs) are released at monthly
intervals from the 2 ovaries, which also
secrete oestrogen hormone; and proges-
terone hormones that control the
reproductive cycle. The ova travel through
the  fallopian tubes  to the uterus. Fertil-
ization takes place if a  sperm released
into the vagina during  sexual inter-
course travels through the  cervix  and
uterus to penetrate an ovum while it is
in the fallopian tube. 
reproductive system, male The male
organs involved in the production of
sperm and in sexual intercourse. Sperm
and male sex hormones (androgen hor-
mones) are produced in the testes, which
are suspended in the scrotum. From each
testis, sperm pass into an  epididymis,
where they mature and are stored. Short-
ly before ejaculation, sperm are propelled
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM, FEMALE
486
into a duct called the  vas deferens,
which carries the sperm to the  seminal
vesicles behind the  bladder. These 2
sacs produce  seminal fluid, which is
added to the sperm to produce semen.
Semen travels along 2 ducts to the ure-
thra. The ducts pass through the prostate
gland, which produces secretions that are
added to the semen. At orgasm, semen is
ejaculated from the urethra through the
erect penis, which is placed in the woman＊s
vagina during sexual intercourse.
resection Surgical removal of all or part
of a diseased or injured organ. 
resistance The ability to oppose. In med-
icine, it has several different meanings. A
resistance to the flow of blood is exerted
by the blood vessel walls. Increased
resistance leads to raised blood pres-
sure. In psychoanalysis, resistance refers
to the blocking off from consciousness
of repressed memories or emotions.
Resistance may also refer to an ability to
withstand attack from poisons, irritants,
or microorganisms. A person＊s resistance
to infection is called immunity. The term
drug resistance refers to  the ability of
some microorganisms to withstand attack
from previously effective drug treatments.
resorption, dental Loss of substance
from  teeth.  The loss may be external
(affecting the surface of the root) or
internal (affecting the wall of the pulp
cavity). External resorption is part of
the processs by which primary teeth are
lost. Some degree of external resorp-
tion also occurs as part of the aging
process, and may also be due to injury,
REPETITIVE STRAIN INJURY (RSI)RESORPTION, DENTAL
R
Fallopian tube
Vagina
Bladder
Vulva
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM, MALE
Prostate
gland
Urethra
Penis
Testis
Bladder
OvaryUterus
Cervix
Vas deferensSeminal vesicle
Scrotum
Epididymis487
inflammation of surrounding tissues, or
pressure, for example from an impacted
tooth. Internal resorption is rare, occur-
ring in about 1 percent of adults.
respiration A term for the processes by
which oxygen reaches body cells and is
utilized by them, and by which  carbon
dioxide is eliminated. Air, containing
oxygen, is breathed into the  lungs and
enters the alveoli. Oxygen diffuses into
the blood, which carries it to cells in the
body, where it is used to metabolize
glucose to provide energy. Carbon diox-
ide is produced as a waste product and
passes into the blood from the body
cells. It is transported to the lungs to be
breathed out (see respiratory system).
respirator See ventilator.
respiratory arrest Sudden cessation of
breathing, resulting from any process
that severely depresses the function of
the respiratory centre in the brain. Causes
include prolonged seizures, an overdose
of opioid drugs, cardiac arrest, electrical
injury, serious head injury, stroke, or res-
piratory failure. Respiratory arrest leads
to anoxia and, if untreated, cardiac arrest,
brain damage, coma, and death.
respiratory distress syndrome An
acute lung disorder that makes breathing
difficult, resulting in a life-threatening
deficiency of oxygen in the blood. There
are 2 types of the syndrome. In prema-
ture babies, the lungs are stiff and do
not inflate easily due to a lack of surfac-
tant. In adults, it develops as a result of a
severe injury or overwhelming infection.
Treatment is for the underlying cause,
and is with artificial ventilation and oxy-
gen; inhaled surfactant is given to babies.
respiratory failure A condition in which
there is a buildup of carbon dioxide and
a fall in the level of oxygen in the blood
(see hypoxia). Causes include lung disor-
ders, such as severe asthma, emphysema,
or chronic bronchitis (see pulmonary dis-
ease, chronic obstructive), or damage to
the respiratory centre in the brain due
to, for example, an overdose of  opioid
drugs,a stroke,or serious head injury.
Treatment is with ventilation and oxy-
gen for the underlying cause.
respiratory function tests See  pul-
monary function tests.
respiratory system The organs respon-
sible for carrying oxygen from the air to
the blood and expelling
carbon dioxide. 
The upper part of the
respiratory system con-
sists of2 nasal passages;
the  pharynx; the larynx
(which contains the
vocal cords); and the
trachea.  The lower part
of the respiratory tract
consists of two  lungs,
which are enclosed in a
double membrane called
the pleura, and the lower
airways (the bronchi and
smaller bronchioles).
These structures are
encased and protected
by the bony ribcage. The
airways terminate in
millions of balloon-like
sacs known as  alveoli,
where gas exchange
with the tiny blood ves-
sels surrounding them
takes place. These small
vessels feed into larger
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM RESPIRATION
R
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Diaphragm
Intercostal
muscle
Heart
Larynx
Lung
Vocal cords
Pharynx
Adenoids Nasal cavity
Nostril
Tonsil
Epiglottis
Trachea
Bronchus
Pulmonary vessel
Pleura
Ribpulmonary vessels for blood transport
to and from the heart. 
Air is inhaled and exhaled (see breath-
ing) by the action of the dome-shaped
diaphragm and of abdominal and chest
muscles including the intercostal mus-
cles between the ribs. 
respiratory tract infection Infection
of the breathing passages, which extend
from the  nose to the  alveoli. This type
of infection is divided into upper and
lower respiratory tract infections. Upper
respiratory tract infections affect the
nose,  throat,  sinuses, and  larynx. They
include the common  cold,  pharyngitis,
tonsillitis, sinusitis,  laryngitis, and croup.
Lower respiratory tract infections, which
affect the  trachea,  bronchi, and  lungs,
include acute bronchitis, acute bronchi-
olitis, and pneumonia.
restless legs A syndrome characterized
by unpleasant tickling, burning, prickling,
or aching sensations in the leg muscles.
Symptoms tend to come on at night in
bed; they may also be triggered by pro-
longed sitting. The condition tends to
run in families and is common in middle-
aged women, people with  rheumatoid
arthritis,smokers,and during pregnancy.
Thecause is unknown, and there is no
single cure; some patients benefit from
cooling the legs, others from warming
them. Treatment with levodopa and calci-
um channel blockers can sometimes help.
restoration, dental The reconstruction
of part of a damaged tooth. Restoration
also refers to the material or substitute
part used to rebuild the tooth. Small
repairs are usually made by  filling  the
tooth. For extensive repairs, a dental
inlay or a crown may be used. Chipped
front teeth may be repaired by bonding
(see bonding, dental).
restricted growth See short stature.
resuscitation See  artificial respiration;
cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
retardation See mental handicap.
reticular formation A network of nerve
cells scattered through the brainstem.
reticulocyte  The medical term for a
newly formed red  blood cell. Reticulo-
cytes are made in the bone marrow
from stem cells. They remain in the bone
marrow for 1每2 days and then pass into
the bloodstream, where they mature
into red blood cells. 
reticulosarcoma See  lymphoma, non-
Hodgkin＊s.
retina The light-sensitive membrane that
lines the back inner surface of the eye,
and on which images are cast by the
cornea and lens. The retina contains
specialized nerve cells (rods and cones)
that convert light energy into nerve im-
pulses. The impulses travel from the
rods and cones through other cells in
the retina and along the optic nerve  to
the brain. The rods respond to very dim
light and cones are responsible for
colour vision.
The retina can be affected by congenital
and genetic disorders, such as colour vis-
ion deficiency and Tay每Sachs disease. It
can also be infected,injured (see retinal
detachment;  retinal tear), or affected by
tumours such as  retinoblastoma. Other
disorders affecting the retina include dia-
betes mellitus and retinal vein occlusion.
RETINA
488
RESPIRATORY TRACT INFECTION RETINA
R
Retina
Optic nerve
Lens
Nerve fibre Rod Cone Connecting nerve cells
Direction
of light
Direction of
nerve impulse
Electrical signal from
stimulated cell
Pigment
cell
Nerve fibres carry
impulses to brain
Cornea
LOCATION
STRUCTURE OF RETINA
Macularetinal artery occlusion Blockage of
an artery supplying blood to the retina,
most commonly due to  thrombosis or
embolism, The disorder can result in
permanent blindness or loss of part of
the field of vision, depending on the art-
ery affected and whether or not the
condition can be treated quickly enough.
retinal detachment Separation of the
retina from the outer layers at the back
of the  eye. Detachment may follow an
eye injury but usually occurs spontane-
ously. It is usually preceded by a retinal
tear, and is more common in highly
myopic (shortsighted) people and in
people who have had cataract surgery.
The detachment is painless. The first
symptom is either bright flashes of light
at the edge of the field of vision, accom-
panied by floaters, or a black ※drape§
obscuring vision.
Urgent treatment is required and usu-
ally involves surgical repair of the
underlying tear. If the macula (site of
central vision) has not been detached,
the results can be excellent.
retinal haemorrhage Bleeding into the
retina from 1 or more blood vessels, due
to diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or reti-
nal vein occlusion. When the macula
(site of central vision) is involved, vision
is severely impaired. Peripheral haemor-
rhages may be detected only when the
eye is examined with an ophthalmoscope.
retinal tear The development of a split
in the retina, usually caused by degen-
eration. A tear is more common in
people with severe  myopia. A retinal
tear may also be caused by a severe eye
injury.  Retinal detachment  usually fol-
lows a retinal tear. If a retinal tear is
found before there is any detachment,
the hole is sealed by  laser treatment or
cryopexy (application of extreme cold).
retinal vein occlusion Blockage of a
vein carrying blood away from the retina.
It usually results from thrombosis  in the
affected vein, and is more common in
people who have glaucoma. Retinal vein
occlusion may cause visual distur-
bances, glaucoma, or blindness.
retinitis Inflammation affecting the ret-
ina. (See also retinopathy.)
retinitis pigmentosa An inherited con-
dition in which there is degeneration of
the rods and cones of the  retina at the
back of both eyes. 
The 1st symptoms appear during or
after adolescence and include night
blindness. Tests show a ring-shaped area
of blindness which,  over some years,
extends to destroy an increasing area of
the visual field, though central vision is
retained, often for many years. Opthal-
moscopy reveals several masses of black
pigment corresponding to the areas of
visualloss. Affected individuals and their
parents should have genetic counselling.
retinoblastoma A cancer of the  retina
that affects infants. The first indications
of this disorder may be a squint caused
by blindness in the affected eye or a vis-
ible whiteness in the pupil. Without
early treatment, retinoblastoma can
spread to the orbit (eye socket) and
along the optic nerve to the brain.
Retinoblastoma has a genetic basis.
People with this cancer lack part of one
of the chromosomes in pair number 13.
Newborn infants from affected families
are given regular eye examinations, and
prospective parents in affected families
should have genetic counselling.
Treatment is by removing the eye, or
by radiotherapy. If both eyes are involved,
the one worse affected may be removed
and the other given radiotherapy.
retinoids See vitamin A.
retinol The principal form of  vitamin A
found in the body.
retinopathy Disease of the retina, usu-
ally caused by  diabetes mellitus or
persistent hypertension.
In diabetic retinopathy, the capillaries
in the retina are affected by aneurysms,
leak fluid, and bleed into the retina.
Abnormal capillaries then grow on the
retinal surface. As these are fragile, vit-
reous haemorrhage may occur. Fibrous
tissue may also grow into the  vitreous
humour. Treatment by laser surgery can
often halt the progress of the condition.
In hypertensive retinopathy the retinal
arteries become narrowed. Areas of ret-
ina may be destroyed, and bleeding and
white deposits may occur in the retina.
(See also retrolental fibroplasia.)
retinoscopy A type of vision test in which
a beam of light is shone from an instru-
ment called a retinoscope into each eye
489
RETINOSCOPY RETINAL ARTERY OCCLUSION
R490
in turn. The effect of different lenses on
the beam of light determines whether
glasses are needed for various refractive
errors, such as  hypermetropia, myopia,
or  astigmatism. Retinoscopy is particu-
larly useful for assessing babies or
young children.
retractor A surgical instrument used to
hold an incision open or to hold back
surrounding tissue. 
retrobulbar neuritis A form of  optic
neuritis in which the  optic nerve  be-
comes inflamed behind the eyeball.
retrograde Moving backwards or in an
opposite direction to normal. For exam-
ple, in retrograde ejaculation, semen is
forced into the bladder rather than out
through the tip of the penis (see ejacu-
lation, disorders of).
retrolental fibroplasia Also called
retinopathy of  prematurity, a condition
that mainly affects the eyes of prema-
ture infants. The usual cause is high
concentrations of oxygen being given as
part of the treatment for respiratory dis-
tress. Excess oxygen causes the tissues
at the margin of the retina to shut down
their blood vessels. When oxygen con-
centrations return to normal, the affected
tissues may send strands of new vessels
and fibrous scar tissue into the vitreous
humour. This may interfere with vision
and cause  retinal detachment.  Laser
treatment may be used.
retroperitoneal
fibrosis Inflam-
mation and scarring
of tissues at the
back of the abdom-
inal cavity. The
fibrosis often blocks
the  ureters, pre-
venting urine flow
from the kidneys.
In severe cases,
this results in  kid-
ney failure. Most
cases occur in mid-
dle-aged men and
are of unknown
cause, but long-
term treatment with
the drug  methy-
sergide can cause
the condition. 
retrosternal pain Pain in the central
region of the chest, behind the sternum.
Causes include irritation of the oesoph-
agus,  angina pectoris, or  myocardial
infarction. (See also chest pain.)
retrovirus A type of virus whose genetic
material is  RNA rather than  DNA and
that uses an enzyme called reverse tran-
scriptase to produce DNAfrom the RNA
template. The DNAcan then be incor-
porated into its host cells. A notable
example of a retrovirus is HIV (human
immunodeficiency virus).
Rett＊s syndrome A  brain disorder,
thought to be a  genetic disorder, that
only affects girls. Symptoms usually
occur when the child is 12每18 months
old. Acquired skills, such as walking and
communication skills, disappear and the
girl becomes progressively handicapped,
perhaps with signs of autism. There are
repetitive writhing movements of the
hands and limbs, and inappropriate out-
burstsof crying or laughter. There is no
cure for Rett＊s syndrome and sufferers
need constant care and attention. Par-
ents of an affected child should receive
genetic counselling.
reverse transcriptase inhibitors A
class of drugs used in the treatment of
diseases, including  HIV infection, that
are caused by retroviruses. The drugs
affect the ability of the virus to reproduce
by blocking reverse transcriptase, a key
RETRACTORREVERSE TRANSCRIPTASE INHIBITORS
R
RETINOSCOPY
Beam 
of light Lens
Retinoscope491
enzyme. Drugs include lamivudine, zido-
vudine (AZT), efavirenz, and stavudine.
Reye＊s syndrome A rare disorder in
which brain and liver damage follow a
viral infection. Children over 15 are rarely
affected. The cause is unknown, but aspi-
rin seems to be a predisposing factor to
developing the condition and is there-
fore not recommended for children.
The disorder starts as the child recov-
ers from the infection. Symptoms include
uncontrollable vomiting, lethargy,mem-
ory loss, and disorientation. Swelling of
the brain may cause  seizures, distur-
bances in heart rhythm,  coma,  and
cessation of breathing. 
Brain swelling may be controlled by
corticosteroid drugs and by intravenous
infusions of mannitol.  Dialysis or  blood
transfusions may be needed. If breathing
stops, a ventilator is used.
The death rate is around 10 per cent,
and higher for those who have seizures,
lapse into deep coma, and stop breath-
ing. Permanent brain damage may occur.
rhabdomyolysis Destruction of mus-
cle tissue accompanied by the release
of myoglobin into the blood. The com-
monest cause is a severe, crushing
muscle injury (see  crush syndrome).
Other causes include  polymyositis and,
rarely, excessive exercise. There is usually
temporary  paralysis or weakness of the
affected muscle. Except in cases of
severe injury, the condition clears up
without treatment.
rhabdomyosarcoma A very rare can-
cerous muscletumour. Treatment is by
surgical removal,  radiotherapy, and anti-
cancer drugs.
rhesus immunoglobulin See  anti-
D(Rh0) immunoglobulin.
rhesus incompatibility A mismatch
between the blood group of a Rhesus
(Rh)-negative pregnant woman and that
of her baby. In certain circumstances,
this mismatch leads to  haemolytic dis-
ease of the newborn.
The Rh system is based on the pres-
ence or absence in the blood of several
factors, the most important of which is
a substance called D antigen. Rh-positive
blood contains D antigen, whereas Rh-
negative blood does not. The blood
type is determined by genes.
Rhesus incompatibility results if a Rh-
negative woman is exposed to the
blood of her Rh-positive baby while it is
being born. There are usually no prob-
lems during the first pregnancy with a
Rh-positive baby. However, the woman
may produce  antibodies against the D
antigen; in a subsequent pregnancy
with a Rh-positive baby, these antibod-
ies may cross the placenta and attack
the red blood cells of the fetus. A Rh-
negative woman can also be sensitized
if she has had a miscarriage, abortion, or
amniocentesis, in which the fetus＊s Rh-
positive blood enters her circulation.
Rhesus incompatibility is now uncom-
mon because injections of  anti-D(Rh0)
immunoglobulin are given routinely to
Rh-negative women during pregnancy
and at delivery. They are also given after
miscarriage, abortion, amniocentesis, or
any procedure that might result in expo-
sure of the mother to fetal blood cells.
Rhesus isoimmunization The devel-
opment of  antibodies against Rhesus
(Rh)-positive blood in a person who has
Rh-negative blood (see haemolytic disease
of the newborn; Rhesus incompatibility).
rheumatic fever A disease that causes
inflammation throughout the body, espe-
cially in the joints. Now rare in developed
countries, it is an important cause of
heart disease in developing countries. It
is most common in children aged 5每15.
Rheumatic fever is believed to be an
autoimmune disorder induced by certain
strains of streptococcal bacteria, and
always follows a throat infection. It can
usually be prevented by antibiotic drugs.
The disease causes fever with pain,
inflammation, and swelling of the larger
joints. The heart valves may be scarred,
leading to mitral stenosis or mitral incom-
petence. Involvement of the nervous
system may cause Sydenham＊s chorea.
The condition may be suspected when
arthritis moves from joint to joint but
may be discovered only after develop-
ment of heart failure or a heart murmur.
Treatment is with  penicillin drugs,
aspirin or other salicylate drugs, and, in
some cases, corticosteroid drugs.
rheumatism A popular term for any
disorder that causes pain and stiffness
in muscles and joints.
RHEUMATISM REYE＊S SYNDROME
R492
rheumatoid arthritis A type of arthritis
in which the joints in the fingers, wrists,
toes, or elsewhere in the body become
painful, swollen, stiff, and, in severe
cases, deformed. Tissues outside the
joints, such as the heart, can also be
affected. Rheumatoid arthritis is an
autoimmune disorder that usually starts
in early adulthood or middle age but
can also develop in children (see  juve-
nilechronic arthritis) or elderly people.
Women are affected more often than
men. There are usually recurrent attacks.
Symptoms are mild fever and aches
followed by swelling, redness, pain, and
stiffness in the joints.  Ligaments,  ten-
dons, and muscles around the joint may
also become inflamed.  Raynaud＊s phe-
nomenon may occur in the fingers, and
swelling of the wrist may cause  carpal
tunnel syndrome and tenosynovitis. Com-
plications caused by severe rheumatoid
arthritis include  pericarditis,  ulcers on
the hands and feet, pleural effusion, pul-
monary fibrosis, and Sj?gren＊s syndrome.
A diagnosis can be confirmed through
X-rays and blood tests. Treatments
include  non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs  (NSAIDs); antirheumatic drugs,
such as  gold,  penicillamine, or  sul-
fasalazine; and  immunosuppressants,
such as  azathioprine or  corticosteroids.
Corticosteroid drugs may also be inject-
ed into the joints.
Physiotherapy is needed to prevent or
limit deformity or to help relieve symp-
toms and maintain mobility. People
who are disabled by arthritis can be
helped to cope with everyday tasks
through occupational therapy. 
In severe cases, surgery may be per-
formed to replace damaged joints with
artificial ones (see arthroplasty). Most suf-
ferers must take drugs for life, but many
can achieve a near-normal level of activ-
ity with effective control of symptoms.
rheumatoid spondylitis See  ankylos-
ing spondylitis.
rheumatology The branch of medicine
concerned with the causes, develop-
ment, diagnosis, and treatment of
diseases that affect the  joints, muscles,
and connective tissue. 
rhinitis Inflammation of the  mucous
membrane lining the nose, which may
cause stuffiness, nasal discharge, and
sneezing. The most common causes are
the common cold (see  cold, common),
which leads to viral rhinitis, and allergy,
which causes allergic rhinitis.
rhinitis, allergic Inflammation of the
mucous membrane lining the nose due
to  allergy to pollen, dust, or other air-
borne substances. Also called hay fever,
it causes sneezing, a runny nose, and
nasal congestion.  Antihistamine drugs
and topical  corticosteroid drugs are
used to treat mild attacks. The drug
sodium cromoglicate, inhaled regularly
throughout the pollen season, may help
to prevent attacks. Long-term relief of
symptoms can sometimes follow desen-
sitization to a pollen allergen by a course
of injections (see hyposensitization).
rhinophyma Bulbous deformity and red-
ness of  the  nose that occurs almost
exclusively in elderly men. Rhinophyma
is a complication of severe rosacea. The
tissue of the nose thickens, small blood
vessels enlarge, and the sebaceous glands
become overactive, making the nose
excessively oily. An operation can restore
the nose to a satisfactory shape.
rhinoplasty An operation that alters
the structure of the nose to improve its
appearance or to correct a deformity.
Incisions are made within the nose to
avoid visible scars. The  septum may be
altered if breathing is blocked and the
cartilage and bone are then reshaped.
The nose is finally splinted in position
for about 10 days. Rhinoplasty usually
causes considerable bruising and
swelling, and the results may not be
clearly visible for weeks or months.
rhinorrhoea The discharge of watery
mucus from the nose, usually due to
rhinitis. Rarely, the discharge consists of
cerebrospinal fluid and is the result of a
head injury. (See also nasal discharge.)
rhythm method See  contraception,
natural methods of.
rib Any of the flat, curved bones that
form a framework for the chest and a
protective cage around the heart, lungs,
and other underlying organs. There are
12 pairs of ribs, each joined at the back
of the ribcage to a vertebra. The upper 7
pairs, known as ※true ribs§, link directly to
the  sternum by flexible costal cartilage.
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS RIB
R493
The next 2 or 3 pairs of ※false ribs§ con-
nect indirectly to the sternum by means
of cartilage attached to the cartilage of
the ribs above. Between and attached
to the ribs are thin sheets of muscle
(intercostal muscles) that act during
breathing. The spaces between the ribs
also contain nerves and blood vessels. 
ribavirin An  antiviral drug, also called
tribavirin, used to treat children with
viral bronchiolitis caused by respiratory
syncytial virus. Adverse effects are rare.
rib, fracture of Fracture of a rib may
be caused by a fall or blow, or by stress
on the ribcage, such as that produced
by prolonged coughing. The fracture of
a rib causes severe pain, which may be
relieved by  analgesic drugs or by an
injection of a local anaesthetic.
riboflavin The chemical name of vitamin
B2 (see vitamin B complex).
rickets A disease caused by nutritional
deficiency that causes  bone deformities
in childhood. Bones become deformed
because inadequate amounts of  calcium
and  phosphate are incorporated into
them as they grow. The most common
cause is  vitamin D deficiency. It also
occasionally develops as a complication
of malabsorption and may also occur in
rare forms of kidney and liver disease.
Rickets due to dietary deficiency is
treated with supplements. The deformi-
ties usually disappear as the child grows.
Rickets occurring as a complication of a
disorder is treated according to the cause.
rickettsia A type of small  bacteria that
can multiply only by invading other living
cells. They are mainly parasites of arthro-
pods such as ticks, lice, fleas, and mites.
Human diseases caused by
rickettsiae include Q fever,
Rocky Mountain spotted
fever, and typhus.
rifampicin An antibacter-
ial drug used mainly to
treat tuberculosis. It is also
used to treat  leprosy and
legionnaires＊ disease.  The
drug is usually prescribed
with other antibacterials
because some strains of
bacteria develop resistance
if it is used alone.
Side effects include harm-
less, orange-red discoloration of the urine,
saliva, and other body secretions, muscle
pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, jaun-
dice, flu-like symptoms, rash, and itching.
The drug interferes with the action of
oral contraceptives.
rigidity Increased tone in one or more
muscles, causing them to feel tight; the
affected part of the body becomes stiff
and inflexible. Causes include muscle
injury, arthritis in a nearby joint, a neu-
rological disorder, or  stroke. Rigidity of
the abdominal muscles is a sign of peri-
tonitis. (See also spasticity.)
rigor A violent attack of shivering, often
associated with a fever. Rigor may also
refer to stiffness or rigidity of body tis-
sues, as in rigor mortis.
rigor mortis The stiffening of muscles
that starts 3每4 hours after death. It is usu-
ally complete after about 12 hours; the
stiffness then disappears over the next
48每60 hours. Physical exertion before
death makes rigor mortis begin sooner.
The sooner rigor mortis begins, the
quicker it passes. These facts are used
to help assess the time of death.
ringing in the ears See tinnitus.
ringworm A popular name for certain
fungal skin infections. Ringworm causes
ring-shaped, reddened, scaly, or blistery
patches on the skin. (See also tinea.)
ritodrine A drug used to prevent or delay
premature labour (see prematurity). Side
effects may include tremor, chest pain,
palpitations, nausea, vomiting, and flushing.
river blindness See onchocerciasis.
RNA The abbreviation for ribonucleic
acid. RNA and DNA carry inherited
genetic instructions. In animal and plant
RNA RIBAVIRIN
R
RIB
Scapula
Clavicle
Rib
Vertebral column
Floating rib
Costal cartilage
Sternum
Ribcagecells, DNA carries the instructions and
RNA helps decode them. In some viruses
the instructions are held by RNA instead.
(See also nucleic acids; protein synthesis.)
Rocky Mountain spotted fever A
rare, infectious disease causing fever
and a rash with spots that spread over
the body, darken, enlarge, and bleed.
The disease occurs in North and South 
America and is caused by a  rickettsia
transmitted from small mammals by
tick  bites. Treatmentis with  chlor-
amphenicol or tetracycline.
rod One of the 2 specialized types of
nerve cell within the retina of the eye that
convert light energy into nerve impulses.
The rods are very sensitive and can res-
pond to very dim light. (See also cone.)
rodent ulcer A common name for basal
cell carcinoma.
rofecoxib a type of COX-2 inhibitor drug
used to relieve the pain and inflamma-
tion of  osteoarthritis and  rheumatoid
arthritis. Gastrointestinal side effects are
less likely than with other  nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), but
mouth ulcers, sleep disturbance, and
muscle cramps may occur. 
role-playing The acting out of a role
(the pattern of behaviour expected in a
given situation). The phrase ※sick role§
describes the type of passive behaviour
expected and allowed of a patient; peo-
ple with social or emotional problems
may unconsciously adopt this role to
gain sympathy and understanding.
root-canal treatment A dental proce-
dure performed to save a tooth in which
the pulp (see  pulp, dental) has died or
become untreatably diseased, usually
as the result of extensive dental caries.
The pulp is removed through a hole
drilled in the crown.An antibiotic paste
and a temporary filling are packed in. A
few days later, the filling is removed and
the canals are checked for infection.
When no infection is detected the cavity
is filled and the roots are sealed with
cement. If the cavity is not filled com-
pletely, periodontitis may occur. 
Treated teeth may turn grey but their
appearance can be restored by bonding
(see bonding, dental), fitting an artificial
crown (see crown, dental), or by bleach-
ing (see bleaching, dental).
Rorschach test A psychological test
based on a person＊s responses to a set of
ink-blot pictures. The test is now rarely
used. (See also personality tests.)
rosacea A chronic skin disorder in which
the nose and cheeks are abnormally red.
The cause is usually unknown, but in
some cases it results from overuse of cor-
ticosteroid creams. The disorder is most
common among middle-aged women.
Rosacea may develop into permanent
redness of the skin, sometimes with acne-
like pustules. In elderly men, it may
lead to rhinophyma. Treatment includes
oral tetracycline or topical metronidazole.
Rosacea tends to  recur for 5每10 years
before disappearing.
ROOT-CANAL TREATMENT
494
ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVERROSACEA
R
Root
Enamel
Crown Gum
Bone
Area to be
removed
Decay
Nerve
Pulp
Blood
vessels
Repaired
tooth surface
Filling
Filled pulp
cavity
Filled root
canal
AFTER TREATMENT BEFORE TREATMENT495
roseola infantum A common infectious
disease, probably viral, that mainly
affects children aged 6 months to 2 years.
There is an abrupt onset of irritability and
fever. The temperature drops to normal
after 4 or 5 days. About the same time, a
rash appears on the trunk, often spread-
ing to the neck, face, and limbs, before
clearing up within 1每2 days. Other symp-
toms may include a sore throat and
enlargement of lymph nodes in the neck.
Convulsions (see convulsion, febrile) may
occur during the fever, but there are no
serious effects. The only treatment is to
keep the child cool and give paracetamol.
rosiglitazone An oral hypoglycaemic drug
used in combination with other oral
hypoglycaemics (either metformin or a
sulphonylurea) in the treatment of type 2
diabetes mellitus. Rosiglitazone acts by
reducing peripheral insulin resistance.
Side effects may include gastrointestinal
disturbances, weight gain, and anaemia.
rotator cuff A reinforcing structure
around the shoulder joint, composed of
4 muscle tendons that merge with the
fibrous capsule enclosing the joint.
rotavirus A type of virus that is one of
the causes of  gastroenteritis, especially
in young children. 
roughage See fibre, dietary.
roundworms Also known as nematodes,
a class of elongated, cylindrical worms.
Some are human  parasites and usually
inhabit the intestines. The only common
roundworm disease in the UK is thread-
worm infestation; occasionally, ascariasis,
whipworm  infestation, atrichinoisis, and
toxocariasis occur.  Some people return
from abroad with hookworm infestation.
Most infestations are treated with
anthelmintic drugs.
RSI The abbreviation for repetitive strain
injury, a type of overuse injury.
rubber dam A rubber sheet used to iso-
late 1 or more teeth during certain
dental procedures. The dam acts as a
barrier against saliva and prevents the
inhalation of debris. 
rubefacient A substance that causes red-
ness of the skin by increasing blood flow
to it. Rubefacients are sometimes includ-
ed in ointments used to relieve muscular
aches and pains and work by producing
counter-irritation: they stimulate nerve
endings to create a superficial feeling of
heat or cold, and distract the brain from
the deeper muscular pain. Examples
include methyl salicylate and menthol.
rubella A viral infection, also known as
German measles. It is  serious only if it
affects a nonimmune woman in the early
monthsof pregnancy, when there is a risk
that  the virus will cause severe  birth
defects in the fetus.
The rubella virus is spread by mother-
to-baby transmission and in airborne
droplets; it has an  incubation period of
2每3 weeks. Infection usually occurs in
children aged 6每12. A rash appears on
the face, spreads to the trunk and limbs,
then disappears after a few days. There
may be slight fever and enlarged lymph
nodes at the back of the neck.
The virus may be transmitted from a
few days before symptoms appear until
one day after they disappear. An unborn
baby is at risk if the mother is infected
during the first 4 months of pregnancy.
The earlier the infection occurs, the more
likely the infant is to be affected, and the
more serious the abnormalities tend to
be. The most common abnormalities are
deafness, congenital heart disease,  learn-
ing difficulties, cataracts, purpura, cerebral
palsy, and bone abnormalities. About 1
in 5 affected babies dies in early infancy. 
There is no specific treatment, apart
from paracetamol for fever. Treatment of
rubella syndrome depends on the
defects. Rubella vaccine provides long-
lasting immunity to the disease; it is
given in the MMR vaccine to babies aged
12每15 months, with a booster at school
entry. Rubella infection also provides
immunity. If a nonimmune pregnant
woman comes into contact with a person
who has rubella, passive immunization
by  immunoglobulin injection may help
prevent infection of the fetus.
rubeola Another name for measles.
running injuries Disorders resulting
from the effects on the body of jogging or
running. Common injuries include  ten-
dinitis, stress fractures, plantar fasciitis,
torn hamstring muscles, back pain, tibial
compartment syndrome, and shin splints.
rupture A common term for a  hernia.
The term also refers to a complete break
in a structure, as in rupture of a tendon.
RUPTURE ROSEOLA INFANTUM
Rlumbar  vertebra, and its narrow lower
part with the  coccyx. The sides of the
sacrum are connected by the  sacroiliac
joints to each  ilium. The sacrum lies in
the centre back of the pelvis. Disorders
affecting the sacrum include  sacralgia,
spondylolisthesis, and sacralization. (See
also spine, disorders of.)
sadism The tendency or practice of deriv-
ing pleasure, particularly sexual pleasure,
from the infliction of suffering or pain
on others. (See also sadomasochism.)
sadomasochism The tendency or prac-
tice of deriving sexual pleasure by
inflicting pain (see sadism) and receiving
abuse (see masochism); one trait usually
predominates. The term also describes
a relationship in which one partner is
very dominant and one is submissive. 
SADS The abbreviation for seasonal affec-
tive disorder syndrome. 
safe period See  contraception, natural
methods of.
safer sex Preventive measures to reduce
the risk of sexually transmitted infections;
for example, maintaining a monogamous
sexual relationship and using a condom.
salbutamol A bronchodilator drug used
to treat asthma, chronic bronchitis, and
emphysema. It is also occasionally used
in the prevention of premature labour.
salicylate drugs A group of drugs,
such as aspirin and benorilate, with anti-
inflammatory, fever-reducing, and mild
analgesic action. Overdose causes hyper-
ventilation, tinnitus, sweating, abnormal
bleeding, biochemical disturbances, and,
in severe cases, convulsions and coma. 
salicylic acid A keratolytic drug used to
treat skin disorders, such as dermatitis,
eczema,  psoriasis,  dandruff,  ichthyosis,
acne, warts, and callosities (see  callus,
skin), and also sometimes to treat fungal
infections. Side effects are few and may
include irritation and dryness of the skin.
saline A solution of salt (sodium chlo-
ride). ※Normal saline§ solution has the
same concentration as body fluids and
may be given by  intravenous infusion to
replace fluids lost in severe dehydration.
saliva The slightly alkaline fluid that is
secreted into the mouth by the salivary
glands and the mucous membranes  lin-
ing the mouth. Saliva contains the
enzyme amylase, which helps to break
496
sac A bag-like organ or body structure. 
saccharin An artificial sweetener. 
sacralgia Pain in the sacrum caused by
pressure on a spinal nerve, usually due
to a disc prolapse. Rarely, it may caused
by bone cancer. (See also back pain.)
sacralization Fusion of the 5th (lowest)
lumbar vertebra with the upper sacrum. It
maybe present at birth, in which  there
are usually no symptoms.Surgery may
be performed to treat a disc prolapse or
spondylolisthesis. (See also spinal fusion.)
sacroiliac joint One of a pair of rigid
joints on each side of the body that form
an interface between the sacrum and the
ilium. They can be strained, usually by
childbirth or overstriding,  causing pain
in the lower back and buttocks. They can
also become inflamed (see sacroiliitis.)
sacroiliitis Inflammation of a  sacroiliac
joint. Causes include ankylosing spondyli-
tis, rheumatoid arthritis, Reiter＊s syndrome
or arthritis associated with psoriasis. The
main symptom is pain in the lower back,
buttocks, groin, and back of the  thigh.
Treatment is with  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs.
sacrum The large triangular bone in the
lower  spine. The sacrum＊s broad upper
part articulates with the 5th (lowest)
SAC SALIVA
S
S
SACRUM
Sacroiliac
joint
Sacrum
Coccyx
Ilium
PELVIS497
down carbohydrates (see  digestive sys-
tem). Saliva keeps the mouth moist,
lubricates food to aid swallowing, and
facilitates the sense of taste. 
salivary glands Three pairs of glands
that secrete  saliva, via ducts, into the
mouth. The largest, the  parotid glands,
lie on each side of the jaw; the sublin-
gual glands lie on the floor of the front
of the mouth; and the submandibular
glands lie near the back of the mouth.
The parotid glands are commonly in-
fected with the  mumps virus. Stones
may form in a salivary duct or gland.
Poor  oral hygiene may allow bacterial
infection of the glands, sometimes
leading to an abscess. Salivary gland
tumours are rare, except for a type of
parotid tumour that is slow-growing,
noncancerous, and painless. Insuffi-
cient salivation causes a dry mouth (see
mouth, dry) and may be due to dehydra-
tion or  Sj?gren＊s syndrome, or it may
occur as a side effect of certain drugs.
salivation, excessive The production of
too much saliva. Excess salivation some-
times occurs during pregnancy. Other
causes include mouth problems such as
irritation of the mouth lining, gingivitis,
or mouth ulcers; digestive tract disorders
such as  peptic ulcers and  oesophagitis;
and nervous system disorders such as
Parkinson＊s disease. In some cases, it
may be reduced by anticholinergic drugs. 
salmeterol A  bronchodilator drug used
in the treatment of asthma. The drug is
usually inhaled twice a day to prevent
asthma attacks. Side effects may include
slight tremor, agitation, insomnia, and,
rarely, a rapid heartbeat.
salmonella infections Infections due to
any of the salmonella group of bacteria.
One type of salmonella causes  typhoid
fever; others commonly result in bac-
terial food poisoning, most often through
contamination of hens＊ eggs or chicken.
Infants, the elderly, and people who are
debilitated are most susceptible.
Symptoms of salmonella food poison-
ing usually develop suddenly 12每24
hours after infection and include head-
ache, nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhoea,
and sometimes fever. The symptoms
usually last for only 2 or 3 days, but, in
severe cases, dehydration or septicaemia
may develop. 
Treatment is by rehydration therapy. In
severe cases, fluid replacement by intra-
venous infusion maybe needed. 
salmon patch See stork mark.
salpingectomy Surgical removal of one
or both  fallopian tubes. Salpingectomy
may be performed if the tube is infected
(see salpingitis) or to treat ectopic preg-
nancy. (See also salpingo-oophorectomy.)
salpingitis Inflammation of a  fallopian
tube, commonly caused by infection
spreading up from the vagina, cervix, or
uterus. The infection is usually a sexually
transmitted one, such as gonorrhoea or
chlamydial infection. Salpingitis is alsoa
feature of pelvic inflammatory disease.
Symptoms include severe abdominal
pain and fever. Pus may collect in the
tube, and a pelvic abscess may develop. 
Diagnosis is by examination of vaginal
discharge, or  laparoscopy.Treatment is
with antibiotics. Surgery may be needed
if an abscess has formed. 
If the infection damages the inside of
the fallopian tubes,  infertility or an
increased risk of an  ectopic pregnancy
may result. In some cases, damage to a
tube can be corrected surgically.
salpingo-oophorectomy Removal of
one or both  fallopian tubes and ovaries.
This may be performed to treat a benign
ovarian cyst. It may also be performed
together with a  hysterectomy to treat
SALPINGO-OOPHORECTOMY SALIVARY GLANDS
S
Parotid gland
SALIVARY GLANDS
Salivary duct Tooth
Tongue
Sublingual gland
Submandibular gland498
cancer of the ovary (see  ovary, cancer
of) or the uterus (see uterus, cancer of). 
salt  Commonly used to refer to  sodium
chloride, a substance formed when an
acid and base react.(See also saline.)
salve A healing, soothing ointment. 
sandfly bites Bites of small, long-legged
sandflies, found in many warm climates,
which can transmit disease to humans.
In tropical and subtropical areas they
transmit  leishmaniasis. In parts of Asia
and the Mediterranean, they transmit
sandfly fever, an influenza-like illness.
In the western Andes, they transmit bar-
tonellosis, different forms of which cause
either joint pain and fever, or a rash. 
sanitary protection Articles, such as
pads and tampons, used to absorb blood
and protect clothing during menstruation. 
saphenous vein A major vein that runs
the length of the leg just under the skin.
It is sometimes removed and used to
bypass a blockage in blood vessels of
the heart (see coronary artery bypass).
sarcoidosis A rare disease of unknown
cause in which there is inflammation of
tissues throughout the body, especially
the lymph nodes, lungs, skin, eyes, and
liver. It occurs mainly in young adults.
Symptoms do not always occur, but
when they do, they include fever, gener-
alized aches, painful joints, and painful,
bloodshot eyes. Sarcoidosis may also
cause enlargement of the lymph nodes,
breathlessness,  erythema nodosum, a
purplish facial rash, and areas of numb-
ness. Possible complications include
hypercalcaemia, which may damage the
kidneys, and pulmonary fibrosis.
Treatment of sarcoidosis is not always
needed. Most people recover completely
within 2 years, with or without treat-
ment, but some develop a persistent,
chronic form of the disease.  Cortico-
steroids are given to treat persistent
fever or erythema nodosum, to prevent
blindness in an affected eye, and to
reduce the risk of lung damage. 
sarcoma A cancer of  connective tissue.
Types are osteosarcoma, Kaposi＊s sarco-
ma, chondrosarcoma, and fibrosarcoma. 
saturated fats See fats and oils; nutrition.
scab A crust that forms on the skin or
on a mucous membrane at the site of a
healing wound or infected area. 
scabies A skin infestation caused by the
mite  SARCOPTES SCABIEI, which burrows
into the skin to lay eggs. Scabies is highly
contagious by close physical contact
and is most common in infants, chil-
dren, and young adults. 
The mite＊s burrows appear on the skin
as grey, scaly swellings, usually between
the fingers, on the wrists and genitals,
and in the armpits. Later, reddish lumps
may appear on the limbs and trunk. The
infestation causes intense itching, par-
ticularly at night. Treatment is with an
insecticide lotion.
scald A burn due to hot liquid or steam.
scaling, dental Removal of dental  cal-
culi (see calcuus, dental) from the teeth
to prevent or treat periodontal disease.
scalp The skin of the head, and its
underlying tissue layers, that is normally
covered with hair. Scalp skin is tougher
than other skin and is attached to an
underlying sheet of muscle that extends
from the eyebrows, over the top of the
head, to the nape of the neck. The scalp
is richly supplied with blood vessels.
Disorders affecting the scalp include
dandruff; alopecia; sebaceous cysts; pso-
riasis; fungal infections such as  tinea;
and parasitic infestations such as  lice.
Cradle cap is common in infants.
scalpel A surgical knife for cutting tissue.
scan An image produced by one of sev-
eral scanning techniques.
scanning techniques Methods of pro-
ducing images of organ structure (or
sometimes function) using sound waves,
radio waves,  X-rays, or other forms of
radiation. Techniques include ultrasound,
CT, radionuclide,MRI, and PET scanning
scaphoid One of the wrist bones. It is
the outermost bone on the thumb side
of the hand, in the row of wrist bones
nearest the elbow.  
A fracture of the scaphoid is acommon
wrist injury usually caused by a fall on an
outstretched hand. A characteristic symp-
tomis tenderness in the space between
the tendons at the base of the thumb
on the back of the hand. Treatment is by
immobilizing the wrist in a cast. 
scapula One of a pair of wing-shaped
bones, commonly called the shoulder-
blades, which are situated over the
upper ribs at the back. The scapula
SALT SCAPULA
Sserves as an attachment for certain
muscles and tendons of the arm, neck,
chest, and back and is involved with
movements of the arm and shoulder.
scar A mark left where damaged tissue
has healed. The body repairs a lesion by
increasing collagen production at the site
of damage. If the edges of a lesion are
brought together during healing, a nar-
row, pale scar forms; if the edges are left
apart, more extensive scarring occurs.
A hypertrophic scar is a large, unsightly
scar that sometimes develops at the site
of an infected wound; some people have
a family tendency to develop such scars.
(See also adhesion; keloid.)
scarlatina Another name for scarlet fever.
scarlet fever An uncommon infectious
disease, more often seen in childhood,
that is caused by a strain of streptococcal
bacteria. Symptoms include a severe sore
throat, high fever, vomiting, and a rash
of tiny red spots on the neck and upper
trunk that spreads rapidly. The face is
flushed, except around the mouth, and
a white coating with red spots may deve-
lopon the tongue. This coating comes
off after a few days to reveal a bright red
colour. The fever then soon subsides,
the rash fades, and the skin may peel. 
As with other types of streptococcal
infections,  rheumatic  fever or  glomeru-
lonephritis may rarely develop 6 weeks
later. Treatment with antibiotics prevents
this and promotes a rapid recovery.
SCAPULA
499
schistosome A type of fluke. Three types
of schistosome are parasites of humans,
causing different forms of schistosomiasis.
schistosomiasis A parasitic tropical dis-
ease, caused by any of 3 species of flukes
called schistosomes, and acquired from
bathing in infested water. The larval form
penetrates the bather＊s skin and develops
in the body into adult flukes, which settle
in the veins of the bladder and intestines.
Eggs laid by adults provoke inflammatory
reactions; there may be bleeding and
ulceration in the bladder and intestinal
walls, and the liver may also be affected. 
The first symptom is usually tingling
and an itchy rash where the flukes have
penetrated the skin. An influenza-like
illness may develop weeks later, when
the adults produce eggs. Subsequent
symptoms include blood in the urine or
faeces, abdominal or lower back pain,
and enlargement of the liver or spleen.
Complications of long-term infestation
include liver cirrhosis, bladder tumours,
and kidney failure. Treatment is with the
drug praziquantel. 
schizoid personality disorder Inabil-
ityto relate socially to other people.
People with this trait, which is apparent
from childhood, are often described as
※loners§  and have few, if any, friends.
They are eccentric, seem to lack concern
for others, and are apparently detached
from normal day-to-day activities. 
schizophrenia A general term for a
groupof psychotic illnesses that are
characterized by  disturbances in think-
ing, emotional reaction, and behaviour. 
Onset can be at any age but is most
common in late adolescence and the
early 20s, and may be triggered by stress.
No causes have been identified, but
many have been implicated. It is likely
that inheritance plays a role. Disruption
of the activity of some neurotransmitters
in the brain is a possible mechanism.
Brain imaging techniques have revealed
abnormalities of structure and function
in people with schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia may begin insidiously,
with the individual becoming slowly
more withdrawn and losing motivation.
In other cases, the illness comes on
more suddenly, often in response to
external stress. The main symptoms are
SCHIZOPHRENIA SCAR
S
Scapula
Clavicle
Humerus
Spine
RibThe sciatic nerves
are formed from
nerve roots in the
spinal cord. 
scintigraphy An
alternative name
for  radionuclide
scanning.
scirrhous A term
that  means hard
andfibrous and is
usually applied to
malignant tumours
containing dense,
fibrous tissue.
sclera The white
fibrous outer coat
that protects the
eye from injury.
The most com-
mon disorder of
the sclera is  scleritis. In  osteogenesis
imperfecta, the sclera is very thin. 
scleritis Inflammation of the sclera that
usually accompanies a  collagen disease
such as rheumatoid arthritis. Scleritis also
occurs in herpes zoster ophthalmicus and
Wegener＊s granulomatosis. It may lead to
areas of thinning and perforation of the
sclera. It is usually persistent but often
responds to corticosteroid eye-drops.
scleroderma See systemic sclerosis. 
scleromalacia Softening of the  sclera,
commonly a complication of  scleritis,
especially scleritis of rheumatoid arthritis.
sclerosing cholangitis A rare condition
in which many of the bile ducts are nar-
rowed, causing progressive liver damage
for which the only treatment may be a
liver transplant. (See also cholangitis.)
sclerosis A medical term for hardening
of a body tissue, usually used to refer to
hardening of blood vessels (as in arterio-
sclerosis) or of nerve tissue (as occurs in
the later stages of multiple sclerosis).
sclerotherapy A method of treating
varicose veins, especially in the legs;
haemorrhoids; and oesophageal varices.
The vein is injected with an irritant solu-
tion, which causes inflammation in the
vessel lining, leading to scar tissue for-
mation and the obliteration of the vein.
scoliosis A deformity in which the spine
is bent to one side. The thoracic or lum-
bar regions are most commonly affected.
500
various forms of delusions such as those
of persecution (which are typical of
paranoid schizophrenia); hallucinations,
which are usually auditory (hearing
voices), but which may also be visual or
tactile; and thought disorder, leading to
impaired concentration and thought
processes. Disordered thinking is often
reflected in muddled and disjointed
speech. Behaviour is eccentric, and self-
neglect common. In a rare form of
schizophrenia, catatonia may occur, in
which rigid postures are adopted for
prolonged periods, or there are out-
bursts of repeated movement. 
Diagnosis of schizophrenia may take
some time and, in some cases, it may
be difficult to make a diagnosis at all. 
Treatment is mainly with antipsychotic
drugs, such as phenothiazine drugs, and
new atypical antipsychotic drugs such
as risperidone. In some cases, the drugs
are given as monthly depot injections.
Once the symptoms are controlled,
community care, vocational opportu-
nities, and family counselling can help
to prevent a relapse.
Some people may make a complete
recovery. However, the majority have
relapses punctuated with partial or full
recovery. A small proportion have a
severe life-long disability.
sciatica Pain that radiates along the sci-
atic nerve. The pain usually affects the
buttock and thigh, sometimes extending
down the leg to the foot. In severe cases,
the pain may be accompanied by numb-
ness and/or weakness in the affected area.
The most common cause is a prolapsed
intervertebral disc pressing on the nerve
root (see  disc prolapse). Other causes
include a muscle spasm, sitting awkward-
ly for long periods, or, less commonly,
pressure on the nerve from a tumour.
Sometimes the cause is unknown. 
Treatment of sciatica is with analgesic
drugs. If the pain is severe, a short per-
iod of bed rest may be helpful, although
prolonged rest may cause the condition
to worsen. Physiotherapy, osteopathy, or
chiropractic may help in some cases. It
is important to maintain a healthy
posture and weight.
sciatic nerve The main  nerve in each
leg and the largest nerve in the body.
SCIATICA SCOLIOSIS
S
Spinal 
nerve 
root
Sciatic 
nerve
SCIATIC NERVE
Spinal
cordof collagen, a protein in connective tissue,
causing weakness of small blood vessels
and poor wound healing. Haemorrhages
may occur anywhere in the body, includ-
ing the brain. In the skin, haemorrhages
result in bruising.  Bleeding into the
gums and loosening of teeth are com-
mon. Bleeding into muscles and joints
causes pain. Scurvy is treated with large
doses of vitamin C. Bleeding stops in 24
hours, healing resumes, and muscle
and bone pain quickly disappear.
sealants, dental Plastic coatings that
are applied to the chewing surfaces of
the back teeth to help prevent decay. 
seasickness A type of motion sickness.
seasonal affective disorder syndrome
A form of  depression in which mood
changes occur with the seasons. Sufferers
tend to become depressed in winter and
feel better in spring. Exposure  tobright
light for 2每4 hours each morning seems
to prevent occurrence in some people.
sebaceous cyst A harmless smooth nod-
ule under the skin, most commonly on
the scalp, face, ear, and genitals. The
cyst contains a yellow, cheesy material
and may become very large and infected
by bacteria, making it painful. Large or
infected cysts can be surgically removed. 
sebaceous glands Glands in the skin
that secrete a lubricating substance called
sebum. Sebaceous glands either open
501
Scoliosis usually starts in childhood or
adolescence and becomes progressively
more marked until growth stops. In many
cases, another part of the spine curves
to compensate, resulting in an S-shaped
spine. The cause of juvenile scoliosis is
unknown. Rarely, scoliosis is due toa
congenital abnormality of the vertebrae. 
In some cases,  physiotherapy may be
sufficient to control scoliosis. Progressive
or severe scoliosis may require immobi-
lization of the spine in a brace, followed
by surgery (spinal fusion) to straighten it.
scorpion stings Injection of venom by a
scorpion into a victim using a sting in its
tail.  Many species are  not dangerous,
but some in North Africa, southern US,
South America, the Caribbean, and India
are highly venomous.Some stings may
cause only mild pain and tingling; but in
more venomous  species  severe pain,
restlessness, sweating, diarrhoea, and
vomiting can occur. Stings are rarely fatal
in adults but require prompt attention. If
pain is the only symptom,  analgesics
and a cold compress may be enough. In
severecases, antivenom may be needed.
scotoma An area of abnormal vision
within the visual field.
screening The testing of apparently
healthy people with the aim of detect-
ing disease at an early, treatable stage.
(See also cancer screening.)
scrofula Tuberculosis of the lymph nodes
in the neck, often those just beneath the
angle of the jaw. Scrofula is rare in deve-
loped countries. Antituberculous drugs
clear up the condition in most cases.
scrotum The pouch that hangs behind
the penis and contains the testes. It con-
sists of an outer layer of thin, wrinkled
skin over a layer of muscular tissue. Swel-
ling of the scrotum may be due toan
inguinal hernia, swollen testis, hydrocele,
or fluid accumulation due to heart failure.
scuba-diving medicine A medical spe-
ciality concerned with the physiological
hazards of diving with self-contained
underwater breathing apparatus. Most
hazards stem from the pressure increase
with depth. Conditions treated include
burst lung and decompression sickness.
scurvy A disease, now rare in developed
countries, caused by inadequate vitamin
C intake. Scurvy disturbs the production
SEBACEOUS GLANDS SCORPION STINGS
S
Sebaceous
gland
Fat
Hair
SEBACEOUS GLANDS
Arrector pili
muscle
Hair
follicle
Sebum
Skin
surface502
into hair follicles or discharge directly
on to the skin surface. They are most
numerous on the scalp, face, and anus
and are absent from the palms and soles
of the feet. Sebum production is partly
controlled by  androgen hormones. Dis-
orders of the sebaceous glands may
lead to seborrhoea or acne vulgaris.
seborrhoea Excessive secretion of
sebum, causing oiliness of the face and
a greasy scalp. The cause is unclear, but
androgen hormones play a part. Sebor-
rhoeais  most common in adolescent
boys; those affected are more likely to
develop seborrhoeic dermatitis and acne
vulgaris. The condition usually improves
in adulthood without treatment. 
seborrhoeic dermatitis See dermatitis.
sebum The oily secretion produced by
the sebaceous glands of the skin. Sebum
lubricates the skin, keeps it supple, and
protects it from becoming waterlogged
or dried out and cracked. It also protects
theskin from invasion by bacteria and
fungi. Oversecretion of sebum (see seb-
orrhoea) causes greasy skin and may
lead to seborrhoeic dermatitis or acne.
secondary A term applied to a disease
or disorder that results from or follows
another disease (the  primary disease).
It also refers to a malignant tumour that
has spread from a primary cancer else-
where in the body (see metastasis).
secretin A hormone produced by the
duodenum when acidic food enters it
from the stomach. Secretin stimulates
the release of pancreatic juice, which
contains bicarbonate to neutralize the
acid, and bile from the liver. 
secretion The manufacture and release
by a cell, gland, or organ of substances,
(such as enzymes) needed for metabolic
processes elsewhere in the body. 
secretory otitis media An alternative
name for glue ear.
sectioning A commonly used term to
describe the implementation of a sec-
tion of the Mental Health Act.
security object A significant item, such
as a favourite soft toy, that provides
comfort and reassurance to a young
child. Attachment to such an item is nor-
mal and usually diminishes by age 7 or 8. 
sedation The use of a drug to calm a
person. Sedation is used to reduce
excessive anxiety and to control danger-
ously aggressive behaviour. It may also
be used as part of premedication. 
sedative drugs A group of drugs used
to produce sedation. Sedative drugs in-
clude  sleeping drugs, antianxiety drugs,
antipsychotic drugs, and some  antide-
pressant drugs. A sedative drug is often
included in a premedication.
seizure A sudden episode of abnormal
electrical activity in the brain. Recurrent
seizures occur in epilepsy.
Seizures may be partial or generalized.
In a partial seizure, the abnormal activity
is confined to one area of the brain.
Symptoms include tingling or twitching
of a small area of the body, hallucinations,
fear, or d谷j角 vu. In a generalized seizure,
the abnormal activity spreads through
the brain, causing loss of consciousness.
Causes of seizures include head injury,
stroke,  brain tumour, infection, metab-
olic disturbances, withdrawal in alcohol
dependence, or hereditary alcohol intol-
erance. In children, high fever may cause
seizures.  Anticonvulsant drugs can con-
trolseizures or reduce their frequency. 
selective serotonin reuptake inhib-
itors (SSRIs) A relatively new class of
drugs thatare used to treat depression.
They work by blocking the reabsorption
of the neurotransmitter serotonin follow-
ing its release in the brain. The increased
serotonin levels that result are associa-
ted with improved mood. Common drugs
in this group include fluoxetine and ser-
traline. SSRIs are usually taken orally
once a day; it may take 1每3 weeksfor any
noticeable improvement in symptoms.
SSRIs usually produce fewer side effects
than other types of antidepressantdrug.
However, they may cause diarrhoea,
nausea, restlessness, and anxiety.
selenium A trace element that may help
to preserve the elasticity of body tis-
sues. The richest sources are meat, fish,
whole grains, and dairy products. 
self-help organizations Organizations,
usually set up by patients or their rel-
atives, that provide people affected by
particular conditions with information,
support, and, sometimes, financial aid. 
self-image A person＊s view of his or her
own personality and abilities. Some neu-
rotic disorders stem from an incongruity
SEBORRHOEA SELF-IMAGE
S503
between self-image and how others see
one.  Psychotherapy treats neurosis by
changing a person＊s self-image. 
self-injury The act of deliberately injur-
ing oneself. Self-mutilation most often
occurs in young adults, many of whom
are also drug or alcohol abusers, and is 3
times more common in women. It may
take the form of cutting the wrists or
burning the forearms with cigarettes. In
some, it is a means of dealing with stress,
such as that caused by child abuse.
More unusual forms of self-harm, such
as mutilating  the genitals, are usually
due to psychosis.Self-destructive biting
is a feature of Lesch每Nyhan syndrome,
a rare metabolic disorder.
selegiline A drug used in the treatment
of  Parkinson＊s disease, either alone (in
the disease＊s early stage) or with  levo-
dopa. Selegiline is also used to treat the
symptoms of parkinsonism due, for ex-
ample, to repeated head injury; it is not
used if the symptoms are drug-induced,
however. Side effects may include nau-
sea, vomiting, diarrhoea or constipation,
dry mouth, and sore throat.
semen Fluid produced by the male on
ejaculation. It is composed of fluid from
the seminal vesicles, fluid from the pros-
tate and Cowper＊s glands, and sperm. 
semen, blood in the A usually harmless
condition in which a small amount of
blood is present in the semen. Occasion-
ally, there is an underlying cause (such as
an infection or, very rarely, cancer) that
requires treatment. Blood in the semen
may also occur after a prostate biopsy.
semicircular canal A structure in the
inner  ear that plays a role in  balance.
There are 3 semicircular canals in each
ear, at right angles to each other, and
connected via a chamber called the
vestibule. The fluid-filled canals contain
small hairs that detect movement and
acceleration, and transmit information
to the brain via the vestibular nerve.
seminal fluid analysis Analysis of
sperm concentration, shape, and motility
(ability to move). It is used to investigate
male  infertility and is also done some
weeks after  vasectomy to ensure that
the semen no longer contains sperm.
seminal vesicle One of a pair of sacs
that lie behind the bladder in the male
and produce seminal fluid, which is
mixed with sperm to make up semen
(see reproductive system, male).
seminoma See testis, cancer of.
senile dementia See dementia.
senile purpura A skin condition in which
areas of the skin develop a purplish or
reddish-brown appearance due to bleed-
ingof small blood vessels underneath.
Senile purpura is a disease of middle to
old age and is more common in women.
senility A term meaning old age or, more
commonly, the decline in mental ability
that may occur in old age. 
senna A laxative drug obtained from the
leaves and pods of the Arabian shrubs
CASSIA ACUTIFOLIA and CASSIA ANGUSTIFO-
LIA, which stimulates bowel contractions.
It may colour the urine brown or red.
sensate-focus technique A method
taught to couples who are experiencing
sexual difficulties caused by psycholog-
ical rather than physiological factors. The
aim of the technique is to make both
partners more aware of pleasurable
bodily sensations, and to reduce anxi-
ety about performance. It is particularly
effective in treating loss of sexual desire
(see  sexual desire, inhibited), or inability
to achieve orgasm (see orgasm, lack of),
and in helping men to overcome  impo-
tence or premature ejaculation (see
ejaculation, disorders of).
sensation A feeling or  impression  that
has entered consciousness. The senses
convey information, about the external
SENSATION SELF-INJURY
S
SEMINAL VESICLE
Urethra BladderVas deferensUreter
Epididymis Seminal
vesicle
Ejaculatory
duct504
environment and about the body＊s inter-
nalstate, to the central nervous system. 
Information is collected by millions of
sense receptors found throughout body
tissues and in special sense organs, such
as the eye. Certain sensory information,
mainly that from the special sense
organs and skin receptors, enters the sen-
sory cortex of the brain, where sensations
are consciously perceived. Other types of
sensory information, for example about
body posture, are processed elsewhere
and do not produce conscious sensation.
sensation, abnormal Dulled, unpleas-
ant, or otherwise altered sensations in
the absence of an obvious stimulus. 
Numbness and  pins-and-needles are
common abnormal sensations. The spe-
cial  senses can be impaired by damage
to therelevant sensory apparatus (see
vision, disorders of; smell; deafness; tinni-
tus). Other causes of abnormal sensation
include peripheral nerve damage caused
by diabetes mellitus, herpes zoster infec-
tion, or pressure from a tumour, and
disruption of nerve pathways in the brain
or spinal cord due to spinal injury, head
injury, stroke, and multiple sclerosis. 
Pressure on or damage to nerves can
sometimes be relieved by surgery or by
treatments for the cause. In other cases,
distressing abnormal sensation can be
relieved only by cutting the relevant nerve
fibres or by giving injections to block
the transmission of signals. 
senses See sensation.
sensitization The initial exposure of a
person to an allergen or other substance
recognized as foreign by the  immune
system, which leads to an immune res-
ponse. On subsequent exposures to the
same substance, there is a much stronger
and faster immune reaction. This forms
the basis of allergy and other types of
hypersensitivity reaction. 
sensorineural deafness Deafness due
to problems with the inner ear, nerves,
or the brain＊s auditory area.
sensory cortex A region of the outer
cerebrum of the brain in which sensory
information comes to consciousness. 
Pressure, pain, and temperature sen-
sations from the skin, muscles, joints,
and organs are perceived in the parietal
lobes, as is taste. Visual sensations are
perceived in the occipital lobes at the
back of the cerebrum; sound is perceived
in the temporal lobes at the sides.
sensory deprivation The removal of
normal external stimuli, such as sight
and sound, from a person＊s environment.
Prolonged sensory deprivation can pro-
duce feelings of unreality, difficulty in
thinking, and hallucinations. 
separation anxiety The feelings of
distress a young child experiences when
parted from his or her parents or home.
This is a normal aspect of infant behav-
iour and usually diminishes by age 3 or 4. 
In separation anxiety disorder, the
reaction to separation is greater than
that expected for the child＊s level of de-
velopment. The anxiety may manifest as
physical symptoms.  Separation anxiety
disorder may be a feature of depression.
sepsis Infection of a wound or body tis-
sues with bacteria that leads to the
formation of pus or to the multiplication
of the bacteria in the blood. (See  also
bacteraemia; septicaemia; septic shock.)
septal defect A congenital heart abnor-
mality in which there is a hole in the
septum between the left and right ven-
tricles of the heart or, more rarely,
between the left and right atria. Usually,
the cause is unknown. The hole allows
freshly oxygenated blood to mix with
deoxygenated blood in the heart.
A small defect has little or no effect. A
large ventricular hole may cause  heart
failure to develop 6每8 weeks after birth,
causing breathlessness and feeding dif-
ficulties. A large atrial defect may never
cause heart failure, but there may be
fatigue on exertion. Pulmonary hyperten-
sion may develop in both types of defect.
Diagnosis may be aided by a  chest 
X-ray, ECG, or echocardiography.
Atrial holes are repaired surgically if
they cause symptoms or if complications
develop. As the child grows, small ven-
tricular holes often become smaller, or
even close, on their own. A ventricular
defect that is causing heart failure is
treated with diuretics and digitalis drugs.
If the hole does not close spontaneously,
it may be repaired by open heart surgery.
septicaemia A potentially life-threaten-
ing condition in which there is rapid
multiplication of bacteria and in which
SENSATION, ABNORMAL SEPTICAEMIA
S505
bacterial  toxins are present in the
blood. (See also bacteraemia.)
Septicaemia usually arises through es-
cape of bacteria from a focus of infection,
such as an abscess, and is more likely to
occurin  people with an  immunodefici-
ency disorder, cancer, or diabetes mellitus;
in those  who take  immunosuppressant
drugs; and in drug addicts who inject.
Symptoms include a fever, chills, rapid
breathing, headache, and clouding of
consciousness. The sufferer may go into
life-threatening septic shock.
Glucose and/or saline are given by
intravenous infusion, and  antibiotics 
by injection or infusion. Surgery may be
necessary to remove the original infec-
tion. If treatment is given before septic
shock develops, the outlook is good.
septic arthritis A type of  arthritis
caused by a bacterial infection entering
a joint via an open wound. Symptoms
of septic arthritis appear suddenly and
may include swelling, tenderness, and
fever. If pus builds up, the joint may be
permanently damaged. 
Fluid is taken from the joint and is
analysed to determine the presence of
infection (see aspiration), and pus may
be drained to help relieve pain. Initially,
treatment is with intravenous antibiotic
drugs, followed by oral antibiotics for
several weeks or months after that. 
septic shock A life-threatening condi-
tion in which there is tissue damage
and a dramatic drop in blood pressure
as a result of septicaemia.
septum A thin dividing wall within or
between parts of the body.
sequela A condition that results from or
follows a disease, disorder, or injury. The
term is usually used in plural (sequelae)
to refer to the complications of a disease. 
sequestration A portion of diseased or
dead tissue separated from, or joined ab-
normally to, surrounding healthy tissue. 
serology A branch of laboratory medicine
concerned with analysis of blood serum.
Applications of serological techniques
include the diagnosis of infectious dis-
eases by the identification of antibodies,
the developmentof  antiserum prepara-
tions for passive  immunization, and the
determination of blood groups in pater-
nity testing and forensic investigations. 
serotonin A substance found in many
tissues, particularly blood platelets, the
digestive tract lining, and the brain. Sero-
toninis released from platelets at the
site of bleeding, where it constricts small
blood vessels, reducing blood loss. In
the digestive tract, it inhibits gastric
secretion and stimulates smooth mus-
cle of the intestine. In the brain, where
it acts as a neurotransmitter, levels are
reduced in people who are depressed;
certain  antidepressants raise the level.
Serotonin agonists are used to block its
effects in acute migraine attacks.
serotonin agonists A group of drugs,
also known as 5HT1 agonists, used to
treat acute attacks of  migraine. They
work on the same receptors in the brain
as 5 hydroxytryptamine (5HT), a neuro-
transmitter and  vasodilator. Common
serotonin agonists include  naratriptan
and sumatriptan. These drugs can cause
chest pain, particularly in people with
heart disease. They should be used with
caution in those at increased risk of cor-
onary artery disease. Other side effects
include flushing, tingling, and nausea.
serotonin antagonists A group of drugs
used to treat the nausea and vomiting
caused by  radiotherapy and  anticancer
drugs. They are also used to control
nausea and vomiting following surgery.
Common serotonin antagonists include
granisetron and ondansetron.
sertraline A selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor drug used in the treatment of
depression (see antidepressants).
serum The clear fluid that separates from
blood when it clots. It contains salts, glu-
cose, and proteins, including antibodies.
Serum from the blood of a person who
has been infected with a microorganism
usually contains antibodies that can pro-
tect other people from that organism if
injected into them. Such a preparation
is called an antiserum; its use forms the
basis of passive immunization. 
serum sickness A type of  hypersensi-
tivity reaction that may develop about
10 days after injection with an  anti-
serum of animal origin or after taking
certain drugs such as penicillins. Symp-
toms may include an itchy rash, joint
pain, fever, and enlarged lymph nodes.
In severe cases, a state similar to shock
SERUM SICKNESS SEPTIC ARTHRITIS
Sdevelops. Symptoms usually clear up 
in a few days;  antihistamine drugs may
hasten recovery. In severe cases,a
corticosteroiddrug may be prescribed.
sex Another term for gender and a com-
monly used term for sexual intercourse.
sex change Radical surgical procedures,
usually combined with hormone therapy,
that alter a person＊s anatomical gender.
Sex-change operations are performed on
transsexuals (see  transsexualism) and
on infants whose external sex organs
are neither completely male nor female
(see genitalia, ambiguous).
sex chromosomes A pair of  chromo-
somes that determines an individual＊s
sex. All human cells (except egg or
sperm cells) contain a pair of sex chro-
mosomes, together with 22 other pairs 
of chromosomes called autosomes. In
women, there are 2 similar sex chromo-
somes called X chromosomes. Men have
1 X and 1 Y chromosome. The genes on
the Y chromosome are concerned solely
with  sex determination; their presence
ensures a male, their absence a female.
The X chromosome carries genes vital
to general development and functioning.
sex determination The factors that
determine biological sex. The underlying
determinants are the  sex chromosomes
which cause the differential development
of the gonads in the embryo. In males,
the testes then produce hormones that
cause the male reproductive organs to
506
form. In the absence of these hormones,
a female reproductive tract develops. At
puberty, another surge of hormones pro-
duces secondary sexual characteristics.
Chromosomal abnormalities or hor-
monal defects can lead to ambiguous
sex (see  genitalia, ambiguous), although
true hermaphroditism is rare. 
sex hormones Hormones that control
the development of primary and secon-
dary  sexual characteristics and that
regulate sex-related functions, such as
the menstrual cycle. There are 3 main
types:  androgen hormones, oestrogen
hormones, and progesterone hormone.
sex-linked inheritance The passing
on to the next generation of a trait or
disorder determined by the sex chromo-
somes,or by the genes carried on them.
Disorders caused by an abnormal num-
ber of sex chromosomes include Turner＊s
syndrome  and  Klinefelter＊s syndrome.
Most other sex-linked traits or disorders
are caused by  recessive genes on the 
X chromosome (see genetic disorders). 
sex therapy Counselling for and treat-
ment of sexual difficulties not due to a
physical cause. It may involve changing
the attitude of the partners towards sex,
increasing their understandingof sexual
needs, and teaching techniques, such as
the sensate-focus technique or pelvic floor
exercises, for specific problems. Sex ther-
apy is particularly successful in treating
vaginismus, premature ejaculation (see
ejaculation, disorders of), lack of orgasm
(see orgasm, lack of), and impotence.
sexual abuse The subjection of a per-
son to sexual activity that has caused or
is likely to cause physical or psychologi-
cal harm. (See also child abuse; rape.)
sexual characteristics, secondary
Physical features appearing at  puberty
that indicate the onset of adult reproduc-
tive life. In girls, breast enlargement is
the first sign. Shortly afterwards, pubic
and underarm hair appears, and body fat
increases around the hips, stomach, and
thighs to produce the female body shape.
In boys, the first sign is enlargement of
the testes, followed by thinning of the
scrotal skin and enlargement of the
penis. Pubic, facial, axillary, and other
body hair appears, the voice deepens,
and muscle bulk and bone size increase.
SEX SEXUAL CHARACTERISTICS
S
SEX CHROMOSOMES
Y chromosome X chromosome507
sexual desire, inhibited Lack of sexual
desire or of the ability to become physi-
cally aroused during sexual activity. 
sexual deviation See deviation, sexual.
sexual dysfunction See  psychosexual
dysfunction.
sexual intercourse A term sometimes
used to describe a variety of sexual activ-
ities, but which specifically refers to the
insertion of the penis into the vagina.
sexuality A term describing the capacity
for sexual feelings and behaviour, or an
individual＊s sexual orientation or prefer-
ence. Heterosexuality is sexuality directed
towards the anatomically opposite sex;
homosexuality is attraction to the same
sex; and bisexuality is attraction to both
sexes. (See also gender identity.)
sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
Infections transmitted primarily, but not
exclusively, by sexual intercourse. Com-
mon STIs include  chlamydial infections,
genital herpes,  pubic lice,  genital warts,
trichomoniasis, syphilis, gonorrhoea, and
HIV infection. Antibiotics can be used to
treat most bacterial STIs. Confidential
tracing and treatment of an affected per-
son＊spartners is an essential part of the
management of STIs (see contact tracing).
Practising safer sex can help prevent STIs. 
sexual problems Any difficulty associat-
ed with sexual performance or behaviour.
Sexual problems are often psychological
in origin (see  psychosexual dysfunction).
Sex therapy may help such problems.
Some sexual problems are due to physi-
cal disease, such as a disorder affecting
blood flow or a hormonal dysfunction.
A disorder of the genitals may result in
pain during intercourse (see  intercourse,
painful). Such problems are addressed
by treating the cause, where possible.
S谷zary syndrome A rare condition in
which there is an abnormal overgrowth of
lymphocytes in the skin, liver, spleen, and
lymph nodes. It mainly affects middle-
aged and elderly people. The first
symptom is the appearance of red, scaly
patches on the skin that spread to form
an itchy, flaking rash. There may also be
accumulation of fluid under the skin,
baldness, and distorted nail growth.
S谷zary syndrome is sometimes associ-
ated with leukaemia. Treatment includes
anticancer drugs and radiotherapy.
shellfish poisoning See food poisoning.
shell shock See  post-traumatic stress
disorder.
shigellosis An acute infection of the
intestine by bacteria of the genus  SHI-
GELLA. The source of the infection is the
faeces of infected people; the bacteria
are spread by poor hygiene.  Endemic
in some countries, shigellosis occurs in
isolated outbreaks in the UK.
The disease usually starts suddenly,
with diarrhoea, abdominal pain, nausea,
vomiting, generalized aches, and fever.
Persistent diarrhoea may cause dehydra-
tion,especially in babies and the elderly.
Occasionally, toxaemia develops. 
Shigellosis usually subsides after a
week or so, but hospital treatment may
be needed for severe cases. Dehydra-
tion is treated by  rehydration therapy.
Antibiotics may be given. 
shingles See herpes zoster. 
shin splints Pain in the front and sides
of the lower leg that develops or wors-
ens during exercise. There may also be
tenderness and oedema in the affected
area. Shin splints is a common problem
in runners. It may be caused by various
disorders, such as  compartment syn-
drome, tendinitis, myositis, or periostitis.
In most cases, the pain disappears
after 1 or 2 weeks of rest. However, if it
is severe or recurrent, a course of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or
corticosteroids may be needed. Rarely,
surgery is performed to alleviate exces-
sive pressure in a muscle. Some people
benefit from physiotherapy.
shivering Involuntary trembling of the
entire body that is caused by rapid
contraction and relaxation of muscles.
Shivering is the body＊s normal auto-
matic response to cold; contraction of
muscles generates heat. Shivering also
occurs in fever. 
shock A dangerous reduction of blood
flow throughout the body tissues, which
mayoccur with severe injury or illness.
Shock in this sense is physiological shock,
as distinct from the mental distress that
may follow a traumatic experience. 
In most cases, reduced blood pressure
is a major factor in causing shock and is
one of its main features. Shock may de-
velop in any situation in which blood
SHOCK SEXUAL DESIRE, INHIBITED
S508
volume is reduced, blood vessels are
abnormally widened, the heart＊s actionis
weak, blood flow is obstructed, or there
is a combination of these factors. Caus-
es include severe  bleeding or  burns,
persistent  vomiting or  diarrhoea, myo-
cardial infarction,  pulmonary embolism,
peritonitis, and some types of poisoning. 
Symptoms of shock include rapid,
shallow breathing; cold, clammy skin;
rapid, weak pulse; dizziness; weakness;
and fainting. Untreated, shock can lead
to collapse, coma, and death.
Emergency treatment is required. This
involves an intravenous infusion of fluid,
a blood transfusion,  oxygen therapy,
and, if necessary,  morphine or similar
powerful analgesics. Further treatment
depends on the underlying cause. (See
also  anaphylactic shock;  septic shock;
shock, electric; toxic shock syndrome.) 
shock, electric The sensation caused by
an electric current passing through the
body, and its effects. A current of suffi-
cient size and duration can cause loss of
consciousness, cardiac arrest, respiratory
arrest, burns, and tissue damage. (See
also electrical injury.)
shock therapy See ECT.
shortsightedness See myopia.
short sight, operations for See LASIK;
photorefractive keratectomy; keratotomy,
radial.
short stature A height significantly be-
low the normal range for a person＊s age.
Short stature in children is often due to
hereditary factors or slow bone growth.
In most cases, growth eventually speeds
up, resulting in normal adult height. Less
commonly, it is due to a specific disorder
such as bone disease (as in untreated
rickets or achondroplasia) or certain hor-
monal disorders such as growth hormone
deficiency and hypothyroidism. Emotional
deprivation, chronic malnutrition and
malabsorption can also limit growth. Cer-
tain chromosomal disorders cause short
stature; stunting occursin Down＊s syn-
drome, and the pubertal growth spurt is
absent in  Turner＊s syndrome. Other
causes of restricted growthin  children
include prolonged use of corticosteroids
and  anticancer drugs. Severe untreated
respiratory disease or congenital heart
disease can also cause short stature.
An affected child＊s growth rate is moni-
tored by regular measurement of height.
X-rays and blood tests may help identify
an underlying cause, which will then be
treated. Growth hormone is given for hor-
mone deficiency, and also to treat short
stature due to disorders such as Turner＊s
syndrome. (See also growth, childhood.)
shoulder The area of the body where the
arm attaches to the trunk.Three bones
meet here: the  scapula,  clavicle, and
humerus.The ball-and-socket joint at the
shoulder has a wide range of movement.
Common injuries include dislocation
(see  shoulder, dislocation of) and frac-
tures of the clavicle or upper humerus.
The shoulder may be affected by any
joint disorder, which in severe cases may
lead to frozen shoulder. Inflammation of
a tendon or a bursa around a shoulder
joint can cause painful arc syndrome.
shoulderblade The common name for
the scapula.
shoulder, dislocation of Displacement
of the head of the  humerus out of the
shoulder joint. The main symptom is
pain in the shoulder and upper arm, made
worse by movement. A forward disloca-
tion often produces obvious deformity;
a backward dislocation usually does not.
Diagnosis is by  X-rays. The head of
the humerus is repositioned in the joint
socket. The shoulder is then immobilized
in a sling for about 3 weeks. 
Complications of shoulder dislocation
include damage to nerves, causing tem-
porary weakness and numbness in the
shoulder; damage to an artery in the
upper arm, causing pain and discolor-
ation of the arm and hand; and damage
to muscles that support the shoulder.
shoulder每hand syndrome Pain and
stiffness affecting one shoulder and the
hand on the same side; the hand may
also become hot, sweaty, and swollen.
Arm muscles may waste through lack of
use (see Sudeck＊s atrophy). The cause of
shoulder每hand syndrome is unknown,
but it may occur as a complication of
myocardial infarction,  stroke,  herpes
zoster, or shoulder injury. Recovery usu-
ally occurs in about 2 years. This period
may be shortened by physiotherapy and
corticosteroid drugs. In rare cases, a cer-
vical sympathectomy is performed. 
SHOCK, ELECTRICSHOULDER每HAND SYNDROME
S509
shunt An abnormal or surgically created
passage between two normally uncon-
nected body parts. 
Shy每Drager syndrome A rare degener-
ative disorder of unknown cause that
progressively damages the  autonomic
nervous system. It begins gradually at
age 60每70 and is more common in men.
Symptoms include dizziness and fainting
due to postural hypotension, urinary in-
continence, impotence, reduced ability to
sweat, and  parkinsonism. The condition
eventually leads to disability, and some-
times premature death. There is no cure
or means of slowing degeneration, but
many symptoms are relieved by drugs.
SIADH The abbreviation for syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (se-
cretion), associated with certain lung or
brain disorders and some types of cancer. 
Siamese twins See twins, conjoined.
sibling rivalry A term that describes
the intense competition that sometimes
occurs between siblings. 
sibutramine A centrally acting  appetite
suppressant drug used to treat obesity
in people who have not responded to
other methods of weight loss, such as
dieting. Common side effects include
constipation, dry mouth, and hyperten-
sion. People taking this drug should
have regular follow-ups and have their
blood pressure and pulse monitored.
sick building syndrome A collection
of symptoms reported by some workers
in office buildings. Symptoms include
loss of energy, headaches, and dry, itch-
ing eyes, nose, and throat. The cause is
unknown, but various factors are invol-
ved, includingair  conditioning, passive
smoking, lack of natural ventilation and
light, and psychological factors.
sickle cell anaemia An inherited blood
disease in which the red blood cells con-
tain haemoglobin S, an abnormal type of
haemoglobin. This crystallizes in the cap-
illaries, making red cells sickle-shaped
and fragile, and leading to haemolytic
anaemia. The abnormal cells are unable
to pass easily through tiny blood vessels.
The blood supply to organs is blocked
intermittently, causing sickle cell crises.
The disease affects mainly black people.
Symptoms usually appear after age 6
months, often beginning with painful
swelling of the hands and feet. Chronic
haemolytic anaemia causes fatigue,
headaches, shortness of breath on exer-
tion, pallor, and  jaundice. Sickle cell
crises start suddenly; they are sometimes
brought on by an infection, cold wea-
ther, or dehydration, but may also occur
for no apparent reason. The sufferer may
experience pains (especially in the
bones), blood in the urine (from kidney
damage) or damage to the lungs or intes-
tines. If the brain is affected,  seizures,a
stroke, or unconsciousness may result.
In some affected children, the  spleen
enlarges and traps red cells at a particu-
larly high rate, causing a life-threatening
form of anaemia. After adolescence, the
spleen usually stops functioning, increas-
ing the risk of infection in those affected.
Diagnosis is made from examination of
a blood smear and electrophoresis. Sup-
portivetreatment may include  folic acid
supplements, and penicillin  and immu-
nization to protect against infection.
Life-threatening crises are treated with
intravenous infusions of fluids, antibiotics,
oxygen therapy, and  analgesic drugs. If
the crisis still does not respond, an
exchange  blood transfusion may be per-
formed. This may be done regularly for
people who suffer frequent severe crises. 
sick sinus syndrome Abnormal func-
tion of the heart＊s  sinoatrial node that
leads to episodes of  bradycardia (slow
heart-rate), alternating bradycardia and
tachycardia (fast heart-rate), or very short
episodes of cardiac arrest. The cause is
usually  coronary artery disease, but may
be a  cardiomyopathy. Symptoms may
include lightheadedness, fainting, and
palpitations. The diagnosis is confirmed
by a 24-hour ECG recording. Treatment
is usually by  antiarrhythmic drugs and
the fitting of an artificial pacemaker.
side effect A reaction or consequence of
medication or therapy that is additional
to the desired effect. The term  usually
refers to an unwanted or adverse effect,
usually following a normal dose, rather
than the toxic effects, of a drug overdose.
siderosis Any of a variety of conditions
in which there is too much iron in the
body. (See also haemosiderosis.) 
SIDS An abbreviation for  sudden infant 
death syndrome.
SIDS SHUNT
S510
sievert A unit for measuring doses of
ionizing radiation. (See radiation units).
sight See vision.
sight, partial Loss of vision short of
total blindness. Partial sight may involve
loss of visual acuity and/or visual field.
sigmoid colon The S-shaped part of
the colon, in the lower abdomen, extend-
ingfrom the brim of the pelvis, usually
down to the 3rd segment of the sacrum.
It is connected to the descending colon
above, and the rectum below.
sigmoidoscopy A form of endoscopy in
which a viewing instrument is inserted
through the anus to examine the rectum
and sigmoid colon. 
sign An objective indication of a dis-
ease or disorder (for example, jaundice)
that is observedor detected by a doctor,
as opposed to a symptom (for example,
pain), which is noticed by the patient.
sildenafil Commonly known by its brand
name Viagra, a drug used in the treat-
ment of  impotence. Because of the risk
of potentially serious side effects in cer-
tain people, the drug must only be used
on medical advice. 
silicone A long-chain, carbon-containing
compound of silicon and oxygen. Synth-
etic silicones are sometimes used as
implants in cosmetic surgery. 
silicosis A lung disease caused by the
inhalation of dusts containing silica.
(See also pneumoconiosis.)
silver sulfadiazine An  antibacterial
drug applied as a cream to prevent infec-
tion after skin grafts or in burns, leg
ulcers, and pressure sores. Side effects
may include permanent grey skin dis-
coloration, rashes, or itching.
simvastatin A  lipid-lowering drug that
acts on the liver enzymes that produce
cholesterol. It may cause bowel upsets,
headaches, and muscle pains.
sinew A nonmedical term for a tendon.
singer＊s nodes Small, greyish-white
nodules that develop on the vocal cords
as the result of constant voice strain. In
acute cases, treatment consists of rest-
ing the voice. In chronic cases, surgical
removal of the nodes may be necessary. 
sinoatrial node The natural pacemaker
of the heart. The sinoatrial node consists
of a cluster of specialized muscle cells
in the right atrial wall. These cells regu-
larly emit electrical impulses, which
initiate the contractions of the heart. 
sinus A cavity in a bone, in particular
one of the air-filled spaces in the bones
surrounding the nose (see sinus, facial).
The term sinus also refers to any wide
channel that contains blood, or to an
abnormal, often infected, tract.
sinus bradycardia A slow, but regular
heart-rate (less than 60 beats per min-
ute) caused by reduced electrical activity
in the sinoatrial node. Sinus bradycardia
is normal in athletes, but in others it may
be caused by  hypothyroidism, a  myo-
cardial infarction, or by drugs such as
beta-blockers or digoxin. 
sinus, facial Any of the air-filled cavi-
ties in the bones surrounding the nose.
These include 2 frontal sinuses in the
SIEVERT SINUS, FACIAL
S SINUS, FACIAL
FRONT VIEW SIDE VIEW
Frontal
sinus
Frontal
sinus
Maxillary
sinus 
Maxillary
sinus
Sphenoid
sinus
Ethmoid 
sinuses
Ethmoid
sinuses511
lower forehead; 2 ethmoidal sinuses be-
tween the eyes;2  maxillary sinuses in
the  cheekbones;  and the sphenoidal
sinuses in the skull behind the nose.
Mucus drains from each sinus along a
channel that opens into the nose. Infec-
tion of a sinus causes sinusitis.
sinusitis Inflammation of the membrane
lining the facial sinuses caused by infec-
tion, usually spread from the nose. The
maxillary and the ethmoidal sinuses are
most commonly affected. 
Sinusitis may cause a feeling of fullness
in the affected area, fever, a stuffy nose,
and loss of the sense of smell. A com-
mon complication is the formation of
pus in the affected sinuses, causing
pain and nasal discharge. 
Treatment of sinusitis is is usually
with  antibiotics and a  decongestant.
Steaminhalations may also be helpful. If
sinusitis persists despite treatment,
surgical drainage of the affected sinuses
may be performed.
sinus tachycardia A fast, but regular,
heart-rate (more than 100 beats per
minute) caused by increased electrical
activity in the  sinoatrial node. Such a
heartbeat is normal during sudden
stressful moments  or exercise.  Persis-
tent sinus tachycardia at rest may be
caused by fever or hyperthyroidism. 
situs inversus An unusual condition in
which the internal organs are situated 
in the mirror image of their normal posi-
tions. No treatment is needed provided
all the organs are functioning normally. 
Sj?gren＊s syndrome A condition in
which the eyes and mouth are excessively
dry. The nasal cavity, throat, and vagina
may also be affected. The syndrome
tends to occur with certain autoimmune
disorders, such as  rheumatoid arthritis
and systemic lupus erythematosus. Most
sufferers are middle-aged women. 
skeleton The framework of bones that
gives the body shape and provides
attachment points for the muscles and
underlying soft tissues of the body. The
average human adult skeleton has 213
bones (counting each of the 9 fused ver-
tebrae of the sacrum and coccyx as
individual bones) joined with  ligaments
and  tendons at points called  joints. The
skeleton plays an indispensable role in
movement by providing a strong, stable
but mobile framework on which mus-
cles can act. The skeleton also supports
and protects internal body organs.
skin The outermost covering of body tis-
sue, which protects internal organs from
the environment. Skin has 2 layers: the
outer epidermis, and the inner dermis.
The outermost epidermis is composed
of dead cells and the protein keratin.As
these dead cells are worn away, they are
replaced by new ones from the inner epi-
dermis. Some epidermal cells produce
the pigment melanin, which protects the
body from ultraviolet light in sunlight. 
The dermis is composed of connective
tissue interspersed with  hair follicles,
SKIN SINUSITIS
SKELETON
Frontal bone
Mandible
Parietal bone
Temporal bone
Occipital bone
Zygomatic arch
Clavicle Scapula
Sternum
Rib
Vertebral
column
Ilium
Pubis
Ischium
Phalanges
Calcaneus
Carpals
Humerus
Ulna
Radius
Femur
Patella
Tibia
Fibula
Tarsals
Metatarsals
Phalanges
Metacarpals
S512
sweat glands,  sebaceous  glands, blood
and lymph vessels, and sensory receptors
for pressure, temperature, and pain. 
skin allergy Irritation of the skin follow-
ing contact with a specific substance that
provokes an inappropriate or exagger-
ated reaction from the  immune system.
There are 2 main types of allergic skin
reaction. In contact allergic  dermatitis,
red, itchy patches develop a few hours
to 2 days after contact with the allergen.
In contact  urticaria, red, raised areas
appear a few minutes after skin contact.
In some cases, skin tests are needed, to
identify the allergen, for contact with it to
be minimized. (See also atopic eczema.)
skin biopsy Removal of a portion of skin
for laboratory analysis in order to diag-
nosea skindisorder.
skin cancer A malignant tumour in the
skin. Basal cell carcinoma,  squamous cell
carcinoma, and malignant melanoma are
common forms  related to long-term
exposure to sunlight. Bowen＊s disease, a
rare disorder  that can become cancer-
ous, may also be related to sun exposure.
Less common types include Paget＊s dis-
easeof the nipple and mycosis fungoides.
Kaposi＊ssarcoma is a type usually found
in people with AIDS. Most skin cancers
can be cured if treated early. 
skin, disorders of the The skin is vul-
nerable to various disorders, including
birthmarks and other  naevi; infections
that may be viral (such as cold sores and
warts), bacterial (for example, cellulitis),
or fungal (such as  tinea, which causes
athlete＊s foot);  rashes  due to vitamin
deficiency or the side effects of drugs;
and tumours, both noncancerous and
cancerous. Acne is common in adoles-
cents and is partly related to the action
of androgen hormones. Inflammation of
the skin occurs in  dermatitis,  eczema,
and skin allergy. The skin is also vulner-
able to injuries such as burns, cuts, and
bites (see bites, animal; insect bites).
skin flap A surgical technique in which
a section of skin and underlying tissue,
sometimes including muscle, is moved
to cover an area from which skin and tis-
sue have been lost or damagedby injury,
disease, or surgery. Unlike a skin graft, a
skin flap retains its blood supply, either
by remaining attached to the donor site
or through reattachment to blood vessels
at the recipient site by microsurgery, so
skin flaps adhere well even where  there
is extensive loss of deep tissue. 
skin graft A technique used to repair
areas of lost or damaged  skin that are
too large to heal naturally, that are slow
SKIN ALLERGY SKIN GRAFT
S
SKIN
Scaly upper layer
Sebaceous
gland
Subcutaneous
fat
Epidermis
Dermis
Sweat duct
Hair shaft
Nerve ending
Arrector pili
muscle
Blood vessel
Hair follicle
Hair bulb
Sweat gland
Sweat pore
Venule
Nerve513
to heal, or that would leave tethering or
unsightly scars.A skin graft is often
used in the treatment of burns or some-
times for nonhealing ulcers. A piece of
healthy skin is detached from one part
of the body and transferred to the
affected area. New skin cells grow from
the graft and cover the damaged area.
In a meshed graft, donor skin is
removed and made into a mesh by cut-
ting. The mesh is stretched to fit the
recipient site; new skin cells grow to fill
the spaces in the mesh. In a pinch graft,
multiple small areas of skin are pinched
up and removed from the donor site.
Placed on the recipient site, they gradu-
ally expand to form a new sheet of
healthy skin. (See also skin flap.)
skin patch See transdermal patch.
skin peeling, chemical A cosmetic
operation in which the outer layers of
the skin are peeled away by the applica-
tion of a caustic paste in order to remove
freckles, acne scars, delicate wrinkles, or
other skin blemishes. 
skin tag A harmless, small, brown or
flesh-coloured  flap of skin that may
appear spontaneouslyor as a result of
poor healing of a wound. 
skin tests Procedures for determining the
body＊s reaction to various substancesby
injecting a small quantity of the sub-
stance under the skin or by applying it
to the skin (usually on patches). Patch
tests are used in the diagnosis of contact
allergic dermatitis. They can also be used
to test immunity to certain infectious
diseases (such as in the tuberculin test).
skin tumours A growth on or in the skin
that may be cancerous (see skin cancer)
or noncancerous.  Keratoses and squa-
mous  papillomas are common types of
noncancerous tumour; other types inc-
lude  sebaceous cysts, cutaneous  horns,
keratoacanthomas, and haemangiomas.
skull The bony skeleton of the head,
which rests on the 1st cervical vertebra.
The skull protects the brain, houses the
special sense organs, provides points of
attachment for muscles, and forms part
of the respiratory and digestive tracts .
The 8 bones of the cranium encase the
brain.The skull＊s facial skeleton includes
the nasal and cheek bones, maxilla, and
mandible. All except the mandible are
fixed together by immovable joints. 
skull, fracture of A break in 1 or more of
the skull bones caused by a head injury.
In most skull fractures, the broken bones
are not displaced and there are no com-
plications. Severe injury may result in
bone fragments rupturing blood vessels
in the meninges, or, more rarely, tearing
the meninges, leading to brain damage. 
A fracture without complications usually
heals by itself; damage to brain struc-
tures often requires neurosurgery. 
skull X-ray A technique for providing
images of the  skull. X-rays of the skull
are usually taken after a head injury to
look for a fracture or foreign body,orto
evaluate disorders that affect the skull. 
slapped cheek syndrome An alterna-
tive name for  fifth disease, an infection
in children caused by parvovirus in
which the cheeks become reddened.
SLE The abbreviation for the disorder
systemic lupus erythematosus.
sleep The natural state of lowered con-
sciousness and reduced metabolism.
There are 2 types of sleep: REM (rapid
eye movement) and NREM (nonrapid eye
movement) sleep, which alternate in
cycles. NREM sleep consists of 4 stages
SLEEP SKIN PATCH
SKIN GRAFT
MESHED SKIN GRAFT
Recipient
site
Pinch
graft
Recipient
site
Meshed
graft
S
PINCHSKIN GRAFT
Healthy
skin514
of progressively greater ※depth§, with
slowing of brain activity. In REM sleep,
the brain becomes more active; the
eyes move rapidly and dreaming occurs. 
Sleep is a fundamental human need, as
shown by the effects of sleep deprivation,
although its purpose is not understood
in detail. The need for sleep varies from
person to person and decreases with age.
Sleep disorders include difficulty in
falling or remaining asleep (see  insom-
nia); difficulty in staying awake (see
narcolepsy); disruption of sleep by  jet-
lag and  bed-wetting,  night terrors, or
sleepwalking. (See also sleep apnoea.)
sleep apnoea A disorder in which there
are episodes of temporary cessation of
breathing (lasting 10 seconds or longer)
during sleep.
People with sleep apnoea may not be
aware of any problem during the night,
but they may be sleepy during the day,
with poor memory and concentration.
Severe sleep apnoea is potentially seri-
ous and may lead to hypertension, heart
failure, myocardial infarction, or stroke.
Obstructive sleep apnoea is the most
common type and may affect anyone,
but more often middle-aged men, espe-
cially those who are overweight. The
most common cause is over-relaxation
of the muscles of the soft palate  in the
pharynx, which obstructs the passage of
air. Obstruction may also be caused by
enlarged tonsils or adenoids. The obstruc-
tion causes snoring. If complete blockage
occurs, breathing stops. This triggers
the brain to restart breathing, and the
person may gasp and wake briefly. 
In central sleep apnoea, breathing stops
because the chest and diaphragmmus-
cles temporarily cease to work, probably
due to a disturbance in the brain＊s con-
trol of breathing. Causes include paralysis
of the diaphragm and disorders of the
brainstem. Snoring is not a main feature. 
People who are overweight may find
losing weight helps. Alcohol and sleep-
ing drugs aggravate sleep apnoea. In
one treatment, air from a compressor is
forced into the airway via a mask worn
over the nose. Night-time artificial ven-
tilation may be needed.  Tonsillectomy,
adenoidectomy, or surgery to shorten or
stiffen the soft palate may be performed. 
sleep deprivation Insufficient sleep. Irri-
tability and a shortened attention span
may occur after a short night＊s sleep.
Longer periods without sleep leave a
person increasingly unable to concen-
trate or perform normal tasks. Three or
more sleepless nights may lead to hallu-
cinations and, in some cases, to paranoia.
sleeping drugs A group of drugs used
to treat insomnia. They include benzodi-
azepines,  antihistamines,  antidepressants,
and chloral hydrate. Sleeping drugs may
cause drowsiness and impaired concen-
tration on waking. Long-term use may
induce tolerance and dependence.
sleeping sickness A serious infectious
disease of tropical Africa caused by the
protozoan parasite TRYPANOSOMA BRUCEI,
which is transmitted to humansby the
bites of tsetse flies. 
One form of the disease, which occurs
in West and Central Africa, takes a slow
course, with bouts of fever and lymph
node enlargement. After months or years,
spread to the brain occurs, causing head-
aches, confusion, and, eventually,  severe
lassitude. Without treatment, coma and
death follow. The other, East African,
form runs a faster course. Fever devel-
ops after a few weeks of infection, and
effects on the heart may be fatal before
the disease has spread to the brain. 
Drugs can effect a cure, but there may
be residual brain damage if the infec-
tion has already spread to the brain.
sleep paralysis The sensation of being
unable to move at the moment of going
to sleep or when waking up, usually
lasting only a few seconds. It may be
accompanied by  hallucinations. Sleep
paralysis most often occurs in people
with narcolepsy. (See also cataplexy.)
sleep terror See night terror.
sleepwalking Walking while asleep.
Sleepwalking is usually calm and aim-
less, although it is sometimes more
frantic when it occurs with night terror.
Some people regularly sleepwalk. Sleep-
walking in children is not normally a
cause for concern and tends to disap-
pear with age. In adults, it may be related
to anxiety or the use of sleeping drugs.
slimming See weight reduction.
sling A triangular bandage used to
immobilize, support, or elevate an arm.
SLEEP APNOEA SLING
S515
The injured arm
may be supported
horizontally or held
elevated, depend-
ing on the injury. 
slipped disc See
disc prolapse.
slipped femoral
epiphysis See
femoral epiphysis,
slipped.
slit-lamp An illu-
minated type of
microscope that is
used to examine
the internal struc-
tures of the front
part of the eye and of the retina at the
back. (See also eye, examination of.) 
slough Dead tissue that has been shed
from its original site; for example, loss
of dead skin cells from the skin＊s surface. 
slow virus diseases A group of dis-
eases of the central nervous system that
occur many months or even years after
infection with a virus. They cause gradual
widespread destruction  of nerve tissue,
with progressive loss of brain function
and a fatal outcome. Examples include
Creutzfeldt每Jakob disease and kuru.
small cell carcinoma One form of
lung cancer. 
smallpox A highly infectious viral dis-
ease that was declared eradicated in
1980 after a global vaccination campaign. 
smear A specimen for microscopic
examination prepared by spreading a
thin film of cells on to a glass slide.
smegma An accumulation of sebaceous
gland secretions under the foreskin in an
uncircumcised male, usually as a result
of poor hygiene. Fungal or bacterial in-
fection of smegma may cause balanitis. 
smell One of the 5 senses. In the nose,
hair-like projections from smell receptor
cells lie in the mucous membrane. When
the receptors are stimulated by certain
molecules, they transmit impulses along
the olfactory nerves to the smell centres
in the limbic system and frontal lobes of
the brain, where smell is perceived. 
Possible causes of loss of the sense 
of smell include inflammation of the
nasal membrane, as in a common cold;
cigarette smoking; hypertrophic rhinitis,
in which thickening of the mucous mem-
brane obscures  olfactory nerve endings;
atrophic rhinitis,in  which the nerves
waste away; head injury that tears the
nerves; or a tumour of the meninges or
nasopharynx. The perception of illusory,
unpleasant odours may be a feature of
depression,  schizophrenia, some forms
of epilepsy, or alcohol withdrawal.
smelling salts A preparation of ammo-
nia that was used in the past to revive a
person who felt faint.
smoking Smoking tobacco in the form of
cigarettes or cigars, or in pipes. Over
100,000 deaths per year in the UK are
attributed to smoking. The main harm-
ful effects of smoking are  lung cancer,
bronchitis,  emphysema,  coronary artery
disease, and peripheral vascular disease.
Smoking also increases the risk of
mouth cancer,  lip cancer, and throat
cancer (see pharynx, cancer of). 
Smoking is extremely harmful during
pregnancy. Babies of women who
smoke are smaller and are less likely to
survive than those of nonsmoking
mothers. Children with parents who
smoke are more likely to suffer from
asthma or other respiratory diseases. 
There is also evidence that  passive
smokers are at increased risk of tobacco-
related disorders and also suffer dis-
comfort in the form of coughing,
wheezing, and sore eyes. 
Tobacco contains many toxic chemi-
cals.  Nicotine is the substance that
causes addiction to tobacco. It acts as a
tranquillizer but also stimulates the
release of  adrenaline into the blood-
stream. This can raise blood pressure.
Tar in tobacco produces chronic irrita-
tion of the respiratory system and is
thought to be a major cause of lung
cancer. Carbon monoxide passes from
the lungs into the bloodstream, where
it easily combines with haemoglobin in
red blood cells, interfering with oxy-
genation of tissues. In the long term,
persistently high levels of carbon
monoxide in the blood cause hardening
of the arteries, which greatly increases
the risk of coronary thrombosis.
snails and disease Snails act as host to
various types of fluke that infest humans,
such as liver flukes. 
SNAILS AND DISEASE SLIPPED DISC
S
SLING
ELEVATION SLING
Injured
arm516
snake bites Most snake bites are by non-
venomous species. Venomous snakes are
found mainly in the tropics; the only
species native to the UK is the adder. 
The effects of a venomous bite depend
on the species and size of the snake,
the amount of venom injected, and the
age and health of the victim. A bite from
an adder or other viper typically causes
immediate pain and swelling at the site,
followed by dizziness and nausea, a
drop in blood pressure, an increase in
heart-rate, and internal bleeding.
Antibiotic drugs and  tetanus antitoxin
injections are given for all bites to pre-
vent infection and tetanus. An injection
of  antivenom is also given for a ven-
omous bite. With prompt treatment,
most victims recover completely.
sneezing The involuntary expulsion of air
through the nose and mouth as a result
of irritation of the upper respiratory tract.
This may be due to the common  cold,
allergic rhinitis, the presence of mucus,
or inhaling an irritant substance.
Snellen chart A method of measuring
visual acuity used during vision tests. 
snoring Noisy breathing through the
open mouth during sleep, produced by
vibrations of the soft palate. Snoring is
often caused by a condition that hinders
breathing through the nose, such as a
cold, allergic  rhinitis, or enlarged  ade-
noids. Snoring is more common when
sleeping on the back. If the underlying
cause can be treated, snoring may stop.
Snoring is also a feature of sleep apnoea.
snow-blindness A common name for
actinic keratopathy.
snuff A preparation of powdered  tob-
acco (often with other substances) for
inhalation. Snuff is addictive because it
contains  nicotine; it also irritates the
nasal lining and increases the risk of
cancer of the nose and throat. 
snuffles A general term for nasal obstruc-
tion, especially in infants suffering from
an upper respiratory tract infection. 
social and communication disorders
A collective term for disorders such as
Asperger＊s syndrome and autism, which
begin in childhood. Problems tend to
persist throughout life. 
social skills training A form of behav-
iour modification in which individuals
are encouraged to improve their ability to
communicate. This is an important part
of  rehabilitation for people with  mental
handicap or those with chronic psych-
ological disorders, such as schizophrenia.
Role-playing is a commonly used tech-
nique in which various social situations
are simulatedin order to improve the
individual＊s confidence and performance. 
sociopathy An outdated term for  anti-
social personality disorder.
sodium A mineral that helps to regulate
thebody＊s water balance and maintain
normal heart rhythm and is involved in
conduction of nerve impulses and con-
traction of muscles. The level of sodium
in the blood is controlled by the kidneys,
which eliminate any excess in the urine.
Almost all foods contain sodium natu-
rally or as an ingredient added during
processing or cooking. Consequently,
deficiency is rare and is usually the
result of excessive loss of the mineral
through persistent diarrhoea or vomiting,
or profuse sweating. Symptoms include
weakness, dizziness, and muscle cramps.
In severe cases, there may be a drop in
blood pressure, leading to confusion,
fainting,  and palpitations. Treatment is
with supplements. In hot climates, sodium
supplements may help to prevent  heat
disorders by compensating for sodium
lost through heavy sweating.
Excessive sodium intake is thought to
be a contributory factor in hypertension.
Another adverse effect is fluid reten-
tion, which, in severe cases, may cause
dizziness and swelling of the legs.
sodium aurothiomalate A preparation
of gold that is given by injection.
sodium bicarbonate An over-the-
counter antacid drug used to relieve
indigestion,  heartburn, and pain caused
by a peptic ulcer. It often causes belching
and abdominal discomfort. Long-term
use may cause swollen ankles, muscle
cramps, tiredness, and nausea.
sodium cromoglicate A drug given by
inhaler to control mild  asthma in chil-
dren and allergic or exercise-induced
asthma in adults; as a nasal spray to
treat allergic  rhinitis; in eye-drops for
allergic  conjunctivitis; and orally for  food
allergy. Side effects include coughing
and throat irritation on inhalation.
SNAKE BITES SODIUM CROMOGLICATE
S517
sodium picosulfate A stimulant laxative
drug used to treat  constipation and to
empty the bowel prior to procedures
such as X-ray,  endoscopy, and surgery
on the intestines. Side effects may
include abdominal cramps and diar-
rhoea. The drug should be avoided in
cases of intestinal obstruction.
sodium valproate An  anticonvulsant
drug used to treat  epilepsy. Possible
side effects include drowsiness, abdom-
inal discomfort, temporary hair loss,
weight gain, and rash. Prolonged treat-
ment may rarely cause liver damage. 
soft-tissue injury Damage to  the tis-
sues (see ligament; tendon; muscle) that
surround bones and joints.
soiling Inappropriate passage of  faeces
after the age at which bowel control is
achieved (usually at about 3 or 4 years).
Causes include slowness in developing
bowel control, longstanding  constipation,
poor toilet-training, and emotional stress.
Soiling due to constipation is usually
resolved with treatment. If there is no
physical cause, psychotherapy may help.
Encopresis is a form of soiling in which
children deliberately pass faeces in inap-
propriate places, such as behind furniture.
solar plexus The largest network of
autonomic nerves in the body, located
behind the stomach between the adrenal
glands. The solar plexus incorporates
branches of the  vagus nerve and the
splanchnic nerves, and sends branches
into the stomach, intestines, and other
abdominal organs.
solvent abuse The practice of inhaling
the intoxicating fumes given off by cer-
tain volatile liquids. Glue sniffing is the
most common form. 
Inhalation of solvent fumes produces
a feeling of intoxication similar to that
produced by alcohol. Solvent abuse can
cause headache, vomiting, confusion,
and coma. Death may occur due to a
direct toxic effect on the heart, a fall,
choking on vomit, or asphyxiation. Long-
term effects include erosion of the lining
of the nose and throat, and damage to
the kidneys, liver, and nervous system. 
Acute symptoms resulting from solvent
abuse require urgent medical attention.
Counselling may be helpful in discour-
aging the behaviour.
somatic A term meaning related to the
body (soma), as opposed to the mind
(psyche), or related to body cells, as
opposed to germ cells (eggs and sperm).
It also refers to the body wall, in con-
trast to visceral (of the internal organs).
somatization disorder A condition in
which a person complains over a period
of several years of various physical prob-
lems for which no organic cause can be
found. The disorder, which is more com-
mon in women, usually begins before
age 30 and leads to numerous tests by
many doctors. Unnecessary surgery and
other treatments may result. The condi-
tion is often associated with  anxiety,
depression, or substance abuse. (See also
conversion disorder; hypochondriasis.)
somatostatin analogues Synthetic ver-
sions of the hormone somatostatin that
acts on the  pituitary gland, controlling
the release of growth hormone. These
drugs are used to treat acromegaly and
symptoms associated with some other
hormone-secreting tumours (particularly
in  carcinoid syndrome). Octreotide is a
common somatostatin analogue.
somatotype A person＊s physical build. 
somatropin A biosynthetic  growth hor-
mone given to children to treat  short
stature due to growth-hormone deficiency.
somnambulism See sleepwalking.
sore A term used nominally to describe
any disrupted area of the skin or mucous
membranes, or adjectivally to describe
an area that is tender or painful. 
sore throat A rough or raw feeling in
the back of the throat that causes dis-
comfort, especially when swallowing.
Sore throat is a common symptom,
usually caused by pharyngitis and occa-
sionally by  tonsillitis. It is often the first
symptom of the common cold,  influenza,
laryngitis,  infectious mononucleosis, and
many childhood viral illnesses, suchas
chickenpox, measles, and mumps. 
A sore throat may be relieved by gar-
gling with salt water. Sore throats due
to bacterial infection are treated with
antibiotic drugs. (See also strep throat.)
space medicine A medical speciality
concerned with the physiological effects
of space flight. For example, weightless-
ness upsets the balance mechanisms of
the inner ear, causing motion sickness.
SPACE MEDICINE SODIUM PICOSULFATE
S518
spasm An involuntary contraction of a
muscle. Examples include  hiccups and
tics. Disorders characterized by spasmin-
clude trigeminal neuralgia and tetanus. 
spasticity Increased rigidity in a group
of muscles, causing stiffness and restric-
tion of movement. Spasticity occurs in
Parkinson＊s disease,  multiple sclerosis,
cerebral palsy, and tetanus. 
spastic paralysis Inability to move a
part of the body, accompanied by rigidity
of the muscles. Causes of spastic para-
lysis include  stroke,  cerebral palsy, and
multiple sclerosis. (See also paralysis.)
specific gravity The ratio of the dens-
ity of a substance to that of water. 
specific learning disability Difficulty
in one or more areas of learning in a
child of average or above average intel-
ligence. Specific learning disabilities
include dyslexia and dyscalculia, where
there is a problem with mathematics. 
specimen A sample of tissue, body fluids,
waste products, or an infective organism
taken for analysis, identification, and/or
diagnosis. The sample may be prepared
for examination under a microscope. 
SPECT The abbreviation for single pho-
ton emission computed tomography, a
type of radionuclide scanning.
spectacles See glasses.
speculum A device for holding open a
body orifice to enable a doctor to per-
form an examination. 
speech A system of sounds by which
humans communicate. Children learn
speech through listening to and imitat-
ing the speech of others. 
Speech production  originates in 2
regions of the cerebral cortex on each
side of the brain. These regions are linked
to the centre for language expression
(Broca＊s area) in  the dominant hemi-
sphere. They send signalsdown nerve
pathwaysto muscles controlling the lar-
ynx, tongue, and other parts involved in
speech. The cerebellum plays a part in
coordinating movements of these parts.
Air from the lungs is vibrated through
the vocal cords  in the larynx. This pro-
duces a noise, which is amplified in the
cavities of the throat, nose, and sinuses.
The sound of the vibrated air is modified
by movements of the tongue, mouth,
and lips to produce speech sounds. 
speech disorders Defects or disturb-
ances in speech that lead to an inability
to communicate effectively. 
Damage to the language centres of the
brain (usually due to a  stroke,  head
injury, or brain tumour) leads to aphasia,
which may impair speech. 
Disorders of articulation may be caused
by damage to nerves that go to muscles
in the larynx, mouth or lips, due to
stroke, head injury, multiple sclerosis,or
Parkinson＊s disease.A structural abnor-
mality of the mouth, such as a  cleft lip
and palate, can also be a cause.
Disorders of voice production include
hoarseness and inappropriate pitch or
loudness. In many cases, the cause is a
disorder affecting closure of the vocal
cords (see  larynx, disorders of). A voice
that is too high or low or too loud or soft
may be caused by a hormonal or psy-
chiatric disturbance or by hearing loss. 
Disorders of fluency include  stuttering,
which is marked by hesitant speech and
repetition of sounds.
Delayed speech development in a child
may be due to hearing loss (see  deaf-
ness), slow maturation of the nervous
system, poor tongue and lip control,
lack of stimulation, or emotional distur-
bance (see developmental delay). 
Many people with speech disorders
can be helped by speech therapy. 
speech therapy A form of treatment
for people who have a speech disorder.
A speech therapist
tests speech and
hearing and devises
exercises to improve
the deficient aspect
of speech.
sperm The male sex
cell, which is respon-
sible for  fertilization
of the female ovum.
Inside the head of
the sperm is genetic
material, while the
acrosome that caps
the head contains
enzymes that enable
sperm to penetrate
the ovum＊s outer
covering. The tail of
the sperm propels it.
SPASM SPERM
S
SPERM
Acrosome
Head
Tail519
Sperm are produced within the seminif-
erous tubules of the testes and mature in
the epididymis. Production and develop-
ment of sperm cells is dependent on
testosterone and on gonadotrophin hor-
mones secreted by the  pituitary gland.
Sperm production starts at puberty.
spermatic cord The structure in males
that runs from the abdomen to the
scrotum and contains the vas deferens.
(See also reproductive system, male.)
spermatocele Aharmless cyst of the
epididymis containing fluid and sperm. 
spermatozoa See sperm.
spermicides Contraceptive preparations
that kill sperm. They are usually recom-
mended for use with a barrier device.
SPF Sun protec-
tion factor, the
degree of protec-
tion a  sunscreen
provides against
sunburn. It is a
measure of the
amount of UVB
radiation a sun-
screen absorbs:
the higher the
number, the more
the protection.
sphenoid bone
The bat-shaped
bone in the cen-
tre of the base of
the cranium.
spherocytosis,
hereditary An inherited disorder in
which there are a large number of
unusually small, round red blood cells
(spherocytes) in the circulation. These
abnormal red cells are readily broken up
when blood passes through the spleen.
At times, the rate of red cell destruction
exceeds the rate at which new cells can
be made in the bone marrow, leading to
symptoms of anaemia. Other symptoms
include jaundice and enlargement of the
spleen. Occasionally, crises occur (usu-
ally triggered by  infection) in which all
symptoms worsen. Gallstones are a fre-
quent complication. Splenectomy usually
leads to permanent improvement. 
sphincter A ring of muscle around a
natural opening or passage that acts as
a valve, regulating inflow or outflow.  
sphincter, artificial A surgically creat-
ed valve or other device used to treat or
prevent urinary or faecal incontinence.
sphincterotomy A surgical procedure
that involves cutting the muscle that
closes a body opening or that constricts
the opening between body passages. 
sphygmomanometer An instrument
used  for measuring  blood pressure. A
cuff attached to the device is wrapped
around the person＊s arm and inflated
until it compresses the main artery in
the arm. The cuff is deflated while the
doctor listens to the blood flow through
a stethoscope. The sphygmomanometer
records the pressure on a mercury-filled
glass column or a digital display.
spider bites Nearly all spiders produce
venom, which they use to kill their prey.
However, only a few species, such as the
black widow in North America, are harm-
ful to humans. Antivenoms are available
for many dangerous spider bites. 
spider naevus A red, raised pinhead-
sized dot, from which small blood
vessels radiate, due to a dilated minor
artery  and its connecting capillaries.
Small numbers of spider naevi are com-
mon in children and pregnant women,
but in larger numbers, they may indicate
liver disease. (See also telangiectasia.)
spina bifida A congenital defect that is a
type of neural tube defect in which part
of 1 or more vertebrae  fails to develop
completely. As a result, a portion of the
spinal cord is left exposed.
SPINA BIFIDA SPERMATIC CORD
S
SPHYGMOMANOMETER
Stethoscope
Sphygmomanometer
Inflatable
cuffspinal anaesthesia Injection of an
anaesthetic into the cerebrospinal fluid
in the spinal canal to block pain sensa-
tions before they reach the  central
nervous system. It is used mainly during
surgery on the lower abdomen and legs.
(See also epidural anaesthesia.)
spinal cord A cylinder of  nerve tissue
that runs from the brain, down the cen-
tral canal in the spine to the 1st lumbar
vertebra. Below that, the nerve roots con-
tinue within the canal as cauda equina.
Grey matter, the spinal cord＊s core, con-
tains the cell bodies of nerve cells.
Areas of white matter (tracts of nerve
fibres running lengthwise) surroundthe
grey matter. Sproutingfrom the cord on
each side at regular intervals are the sen-
sory and motor spinal nerve roots. The
small nodule (ganglion) in each sensory
root comprises nerve cell bodies. Nerve
roots combine to form the spinal nerves
that link the spinal cord to all regions of
the trunk and limbs. The entire spinal
cord is bathedin cerebrospinal fluid and
surrounded by the meninges.
The nerve tracts in the white matter act
mainly as highways for sensory informa-
tion passing up to the brain or motor
signals passing down. However, the cord
processes some sensory information
itself and provides motor responses
without involving the brain. Many reflex
actions are controlled in this way. 
The spinal cord may be injured by
trauma(see  spinal injury); spinal-cord
infections such as  poliomyelitis are rare
but can cause serious damage.
spinal fusion Major surgery to join 2 or
more adjacent  vertebrae. It is perfor-
med if abnormal movement between
adjacent vertebrae causes severe back
pain or may damage the spinal cord.  
spinal injury Damage to the spine and
sometimes to the  spinal cord. Spinal
injury is most often the result of falling
from a height or of a road traffic accident.
Damage to the vertebrae and their liga-
ments usually causes severe pain and
swelling of the affected area. Damage to
the spinal cord results in paralysis and/or
loss of sensation below the site of injury.
X-rays of the spine are carried out to
determine the extent of damage. If the
bones are dislocated, surgery is needed
to manipulate them back into position.
Treatment with the drug  methylpred-
nisolone within a few hours of an injury
aids recovery from spinal-cord damage.
Surgery may be needed to remove any
pressure on the cord, but damaged nerve
tracts cannot be repaired. Physiotherapy
may stop joints locking and muscles
contracting as the result of paralysis.
If there is no spinal-cord damage,
recovery is usually complete. In cases of
spinal-cord damage, some improve-
ment may occur for up to 12 months. 
spinal nerves A set of 31 pairs of nerves
that connect to the  spinal cord. Spinal
nerves emerge in 2 rows from either side
of the spinal cord and leave the  spine
through gaps between adjacent  verte-
brae. The nerves then branch out to
supply all parts of the trunk, arms, and
legs with sensory and motor nerve fibres. 
SPINAL ANAESTHESIA SPINAL NERVES
S SPINAL CORD
White matter
Grey matter
Motor
nerve
root
Sensory
nerve root
Meninges
LOCATION
Brain
Spinal
cord
Spinal
nerve
Ganglion
Spinal
nerve
520
Cauda
equina
STRUCTURE OF SPINAL CORD Disc prolapse may lead to pressure on 
a spinal nerve, causing pain. Injury to a
nerve may lead to loss of sensation or
movement in the area supplied by the
nerve. (See also nerve injury; neuropathy.)
spinal tap See lumbar puncture.
spine The column of bones and carti-
lage that extends from the base of the
skull to the pelvis, enclosing the  spinal
cord and supporting the trunk and head. 
The spine is made up of 33 roughly
cylindrical vertebrae. Each pair of adja-
cent vertebrae is connected by a facet
joint, which stabilizes the vertebral col-
umn. Between each pair of vertebrae lies
a disc-shaped pad of cartilage called an
intervertebral disc (see  disc, interverte-
bral). These discs cushion the vertebrae
during movement. The vertebrae are
bound together by 2  ligaments running
the length of the spine and by smaller
ligaments  between each vertebra.
Attached to the
vertebrae are sev-
eral groups of
muscles, which
control movement
of, and help to
support, the spine. 
spine, disorders
of Many disorders
of the spine cause
back pain.  Spina
bifida is a congen-
ital disorder in
which part of the
spinal cord is ex-
posed. Sometimes,
the spine is abnor-
mallycurved (see
lordosis, kyphosis,
scoliosis).In ankylo-
sing spondylitis, and
in some casesof
rheumatoid arth-
ritis, spinal joints
are affected; osteo-
arthritis affects the
spinal joints of
most people over
60. Other disorders
affecting the spine
are  spinal injuries;
disc prolapse, and
spondylolisthesis.
521
spirochaete A spiral-shaped bacterium.
Spirochaetes cause syphilis, leptospirosis,
relapsing fever, and Lyme disease.
spirometry A  pulmonary function test
used to diagnose or assess a lung disor-
der or to monitor treatment. It records the
rate at which a person exhales air from
the lungs and the total volume exhaled.
spironolactone A potassium-sparing
diuretic drug, which is  given to treat
heart failure.  Spironolactone maycause
numbness, weakness, and nausea. Less
common side effects include diarrhoea,
lethargy, impotence, rash, and irregular
menstruation. High doses may cause
abnormal breast enlargement in men.
spleen An organ that removes worn-out
and defective red blood cells from the
circulation and helps to fight infection by
producing some of the antibodies,  lym-
phocytes, and  phagocytes that destroy
invading microorganisms. The spleen is
a fist-sized, spongy organ in the upper
left abdomen behind the lower ribs. 
The spleen enlarges in many diseases.
These include infections such as malaria
and  infectious mononucleosis; blood dis-
orders such as  leukaemia,  thalassaemia,
and  sickle cell anaemia; and tumours
such as lymphomas. Enlargement of the
spleen may be accompanied by hyper-
splenism. The spleen may be ruptured by
a severe blow to the abdomen. This can
SPLEEN SPINAL TAP
S
SPINE
Cervical
spine (7 
vertebrae)
Lumbar
spine (5
vertebrae)
Sacrum
(5 fused
vertebrae)
Coccyx
(4 fused
vertebrae)
Thoracic
spine (12
vertebrae)
SPIROMETRY
Monitor Nose clip
Spirometer522
cause potentially fatal haemorrhage, and
an emergency splenectomy is needed. 
splenectomy Surgical removal of the
spleen. Splenectomy is performed  after
the spleen has been seriously injured or
to treat hypersplenism or certain forms
of  anaemia. The absence of the spleen
does not normally cause problems; its
function is largely taken over by other
parts of the lymphatic system and by the
liver. People who have had a splenec-
tomy are more susceptible to certain
infections and are given pneumococcal
vaccine and long-term antibiotics. 
splint A device used to immobilize a
part of the body. 
splinter haemorrhage Bleeding under
the fingernails visible as tiny splinter-
like marks. Usually due to trauma, it can
also be a sign of infective endocarditis.
splinting The application of a  splint,
most often used to immobilize a frac-
tured or otherwise injured limb or digit. 
splinting, dental The mechanical join-
ing of several teeth to hold them firmly
in place while an injury heals or while
periodontal disease is treated. 
split personality A common term for
multiple personality. It is also used,
incorrectly, to describe schizophrenia.
spondylitis Inflammation of the joints
between the vertebrae in the spine. It is
usually caused by osteoarthritis, rheum-
atoid arthritis, or ankylosing spondylitis.
spondylolisthesis The slipping forwards
(or occasionally backwards) of a  verte-
bra over the one below it. 
spondylolysis A disorder of the spine in
which the arch of the 5th (or, rarely, the
4th) lumbar vertebra consists of soft
fibrous tissue instead of normal bone. As
a result, the arch is weak and prone to
damage under stress, which may produce
spondylolisthesis. Otherwise, spondyloly-
sisis usually symptomless.See cervical
spondylosis; cervical osteoarthritis.
sporotrichosis A chronic infection cau-
sedby the fungus SPOROTHRIX SCHENCKII,
which grows on plants. The infection is
most often contracted through a skin
wound; gardeners are particularly vul-
nerable. An ulcer develops at the site of
the wound, followed by the formation 
of nodules in lymph channels around
the site. Potassium iodide solution taken
orally usually clears up the  infection.
Rarely, in people with reduced immunity,
sporotrichosis spreads to other  parts of
the body and requires treatmentwith
amphotericin, an antifungal drug .
sport, drugs and Four main types of
drug are abused by athletes to enhance
physical or mental condition. Stimulants
such as amfetamines canprevent fatigue
and increase confidence. Three  types of
hormone drugs may be abused: anabolic
steroids (see steroids, anabolic)to speed
muscle recovery after exercise; erythropo-
ietin to boost the haemoglobin content
of the blood, which may increase stam-
ina; and  growth hormone to stimulate
muscle growth. Analgesicdrugs may be
used to mask the pain of an injury. Beta-
blockers are taken to reduce tremor in
sports that require a steady hand. Aside
from the health risks associated with
abuse of these drugs, their use is pro-
hibited in many competitive sports.
sports injuries Any injury that arises
during sports participation. Typical
sports injuries include  fractures,  head
injury (including  concussion), muscle
strain or  compartment syndrome, liga-
ment sprain, tendinitis or tendon rupture,
and joint dislocation or subluxation. Some
so-called sports injuries, such as  tennis
elbow, are in fact a type of overuse injury.
sports medicine The medical speciality
concerned with assessment and improve-
ment of  fitness and the treatment and
prevention of disorders related to sports.
spot A general term for a small lump,
mark, or inflamed area on the skin. 
spotting See breakthrough bleeding.
sprain Tearing or stretching of the  liga-
ments that hold together the bone ends
in a joint, caused by a sudden pull. The
ankle is the most commonly sprained
joint. A sprain causes painful swelling
of the joint, which cannot be moved
without increasing the pain. There may
also be spasm of surrounding muscles. 
Treatment consists of applying an ice-
pack, wrappingthe joint in a bandage,
resting it in a raised position, and tak-
ing  analgesic drugs. In severe cases,
surgical repair may be necessary. 
sprue An intestinal disorder causing
failure to absorb nutrients from food.
(See also sprue, tropical; coeliac disease.)
SPLENECTOMY SPRUE
Ssprue, tropical A disease of the small
intestine that causes failure to absorb
nutrients from food. It occurs mainly in
India, the Far East, and the Caribbean.
Sprue leads to malnutrition and  mega-
loblastic  anaemia. It may be due to an
intestinal infection. Symptoms include
appetite and weight loss, an inflamed
mouth, and fatty diarrhoea. Diagnosis is
confirmed by jejunal biopsy. Sprue resp-
onds well to  antibiotic drug treatment
and vitamin and mineral supplements.
sputum Mucous material produced by
cells lining the respiratory tract. Sputum
production may be increased by respira-
tory tract infection, an allergic reaction
(see asthma), or inhalation of irritants. 
squamous cell carcinoma One of the
most common types of  skin cancer.
Squamous cell carcinoma is linked to
long-term exposure to sunlight. It is most
common in fair-skinned people over 60. 
The tumour starts as a small, painless
lump or patch (usually on the lip, ear, or
back of the hand), which enlarges fairly
rapidly, often resembling a wart or ulcer.
Left untreated, the cancer may spread to
other parts of the body and prove fatal. 
Diagnosis is based on a  skin biopsy.
The tumour is removed surgically or
destroyed by radiotherapy. 
squint An abnormal deviation of 1 eye
relative to the other. Many babies have a
squint because the mechanism for align-
ing the eyes has not  yet developed. A
squint that starts later in childhood is
usually due to breakdown of the align-
ment mechanism. Longsightedness is a
common factor. In some cases, the brain
suppresses the imagefrom the deviating
eye, leading to amblyopia. 
In adults, squint may be a symptom of
stroke,  diabetes mellitus, multiple scler-
osis,  hyperthyroidism, or a tumour. A
squint in adults causes double vision. 
Treatment in children up to 6每7 years
may include covering the normal eye with
a patch to force the child to use the weak
eye. Deviation of the squinting eye may
be controlled by glasses and/or surgery.
Sudden onset of a squint in adults may
have a serious underlying cause and
must be investigated promptly. 
SSRIs See  selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors.
stable A term used in medicine to des-
cribe a patient＊s condition that is neither
deteriorating nor improving; a personal-
ity that is not susceptible to mental
illness; or a chemical substance that is
resistant to changes in its composition
or physical state, or is not radioactive.
stage A term used in medicine to refer
to a phase in the course of a disease,
particularly in the progression of cancer.
staining The process of dyeing specimens
of cells, tissues, or microorganisms in
order for them to be clearly visible or
easily identifiable under a microscope.
stammering See stuttering.
Stanford每Binet test A type of  intelli-
gence test.
stanozolol A type of anabolic steroid
drug (see steroids, anabolic).
stapedectomy An operation on the ear
to remove the stapes and replace it with
an artificial substitute. It is used to treat
deafness due to otosclerosis. 
STAPEDECTOMY SPRUE, TROPICAL
S
523
STAPEDECTOMY
LOCATION
Area of
stapes 
to be 
removed
Base of
stapes Eardrum
Prosthetic
piston
Bony
overgrowth
Hole in
bony area
Inner ear
AFTER SURGERY BEFORE SURGERY
Middle ear524
stapes The innermost of the 3 tiny,
sound-conducting bones in the middle
ear. The stapes is the smallest bone in
the body. Its head articulates with the
incus, and its base fits into the oval
window in the wall of the inner ear.
In  otosclerosis, the stapes becomes
fixed and cannot transmit sound to the
inner ear. Resultant hearing loss can be
treated by stapedectomy.
staphylococcal infections Infections
caused by bacteria of the genus STAPHYLO-
COCCUS. Different types of staphylococci
are responsible for a variety of disorders,
including skin infections such as  pus-
tules, boils, and abscesses,and a rash in
newborn babies (see  necrolysis, toxic
epidermal); pneumonia;  toxic shock syn-
drome in menstruating women; urinary
tract infection; food poisoning; and, if the
bacteria enter the circulation,  septic
shock, infectious  arthritis, osteomyelitis,
or bacterial endocarditis. 
starch See carbohydrates.
starvation A condition caused by lack
of food over a long period, resulting in
weight loss, changes in metabolism, and
extreme hunger. (See also anorexia ner-
vosa; fasting; nutritional disorders.) 
stasis Slowing down or cessation of flow.
statins A type of lipid-lowering drug used
to treat high blood levels of cholesterol
or to lower blood lipid levels in people
with coronary artery disease.
statistics, medical The collection and
analysis of numerical data relating to
medicine. Information on the  incidence
and prevalence of various conditions is
an important aspect of medical statistics. 
statistics, vital Assessment of a popu-
lation＊s health that relies on the
collection of data on birth and death
rates and on the causes of death.
status asthmaticus A severe and pro-
longed attack of  asthma. This is a
potentially life-threatening condition
that requires urgent treatment.
status epilepticus Prolonged or repea-
tedepileptic seizures without recovery
of consciousness between attacks. This
is a medical emergency that may be
fatal if not treated promptly. It is more
likely to occur if  anticonvulsant drugs
are taken erratically or if they are with-
drawn suddenly. (See also epilepsy.) 
steam inhalation A method of relieving
some of the symptoms of colds, sinusi-
tis, and laryngitis by breathing in hot
vapour from a bowl of hot water. The
moisture loosens secretions in the nose
and throat, making them easier to clear.
steatorrhoea The presence of excessive
fat in the faeces. Steatorrhoea causes
offensive-smelling, bulky, loose, greasy,
pale-coloured faeces, which float in the
toilet. Steatorrhoea may occur in panc-
reatitis and coeliac disease and after the
removal of substantial segments of
small intestine. It is also a side effect 
of some lipid-lowering drugs.
Stein-Leventhal syndrome See ovary,
polycystic.
stem cell A basic cell in the body from
which more specialized cells are formed.
Stem cells within the bone marrow pro-
duce  blood cells through a series of
maturation steps. Stem cells are found
in blood and can be transplanted as an
alternative to bone marrow transplanta-
tion. Stem cells can be obtained from a
donor sibling, a matched but unrelated
donor, or from stored umbilical blood.
Patients can also act as their own
donors, with cells harvested and stored
to be reinfused later after treatment has
damaged the bone marrow. Stem-cell
transplantation is used mainly for peo-
ple being treated for leukaemia and
other cancers but may, in the future, be
used for noncancerous disorders.
STAPES STEM CELL
S
STEAM INHALATION
Towel
Hot
waterto prevent sperm reaching the ova.
Female sterilization is usually per-
formed by laparoscopy, which involves 2
small incisions in the abdomen. Some-
times it is done by minilaparotomy, in
which a single incision is made in the
pubic area. The fallopian tubes are
sealed using clips or by cutting and
tying. The operations have a low failure
rate. Fertility can sometimes be restored
after sterilization using microsurgery.
sterilization, male See vasectomy.
sternum The long, narrow, flat plate of
bone at the front of the chest. The ster-
num has 3parts: an upper, triangular
portion (manubrium); a long middle part
(body); and, at the lower end, a small,
leaf-shaped projection (xiphoid process).
The upper manubrium articulates with
the inner ends of the clavicles. The ribs
are attached to the sides of the manubri-
umand bodyby cartilage. Between the
manubrium and body is a  symphysis
joint, allowing slight movement when
the ribs rise and fall during breathing.
Great force is required to fracture the
sternum. The main danger of such an
injury is the possibility that the broken
bone may be driven inwards, damaging
the heart, which lies behind the sternum.
steroid drugs A group of drugs includ-
ing  corticosteroid drugs and anabolic
steroids (see steroids, anabolic).
steroids, anabolic Drugs that have an
anabolic (protein-building) effect similar
to  testosterone. Anabolic steroids build
tissue, promote muscle recovery after 
an injury, and strengthen  bones. They
are used to treat
some types of
anaemia. Anabolic
steroids are often
abused by athletes.
Possible adverse
effects of the drugs
includeacne, oede-
ma, damage to the
liver and adrenal
glands, infertility,
impotence in men,
and  virilization in
women.
stethoscope An
instrument that is
used for listening
stenosis Narrowing of a duct, canal,
passage, or tubular organ. 
stent A rigid tube that is surgically inser-
ted to open up or keep open any body
canal that may have become narrowed or
closed up due to disease. Stents are used
to open narrowed coronary arteries in
heart disease. They are also used to
relieve blockages caused by a tumour, for
example in the oesophagus or pancreas.
sterculia A bulk-forming laxative used to
treat constipation. It is especially useful
when stools are small and hard. Stercu-
lia should only be used if fibre intake
cannot be increased; adequate fluid
intake must be maintained to avoid in-
testinal obstruction. Side effects may
include flatulence, bloating, and gastro-
intestinal obstruction or impaction.
stereotaxic surgery Brain operations
carried out by inserting delicate instru-
ments through a surgically created hole
in the skull and guiding them, with the
aid of  CT scanning, to a specific area.
Stereotaxic procedures can be used to
treat pituitary tumours; for a brain biopsy;
or to destroy small areas of the brain to
treat disabling neurological disorders. 
sterility The state either of being germ-
free or of permanent infertility.
sterilization The  complete destruction
or removal of living organisms, usually to
prevent spread of infection; any proce-
dure that renders a person infertile(see
sterilization, female; vasectomy).
sterilization, female A usually perma-
nent method of  contraception in which
the fallopian tubes are sealed in order
STETHOSCOPE STENOSIS
S STERILIZATION, FEMALE
Clip blocking
fallopian tube
Fallopian tube
Uterus
525
SITES OF INCISIONLAPAROSCOPIC CLIP STERILIZATION
Ovary
Cervix
Vagina526
to sounds in the body, particularly
those made by the heart or lungs.
Stevens每Johnson syndrome A rare,
life-threatening form of  erythema multi-
forme characterized by severe blisters and
bleeding in the mucous membranes of
the eyes, mouth, nose, and genitals. 
sticky eye One of the symptoms of con-
junctivitis  in which the eyelids become
stuck together with discharge.
stiff neck A common symptom, usually
due to spasm in muscles at the side or
back of the neck. In most cases, it occurs
suddenly and for no apparent reason. It
may result from a neck injury, such as a
ligament sprain,  disc prolapse, or whip-
lash injury. A rare cause is meningitis.
Mild stiffness may be relieved by mas-
sage, warming, and use of a  liniment.
Severe or persistent stiffness requires
medical attention. (See also torticollis.)
stiffness A term used to describe difficulty
in moving a joint or stretching a muscle. 
stilboestrol A drug that mimics the
natural oestrogen hormone  estradiol. It
is occasionally used to treat prostate can-
cer. Side effects are those of oestrogens. 
stillbirth Delivery of a dead fetus after
the 24th week of pregnancy. The cause is
unknown in many cases. Some stillborn
babies have severe malformations, such
as  anencephaly,  spina bifida, or  hydro-
cephalus. Other possible causes include
a maternal disorder, such as antepartum
haemorrhage or hypertension, or severe
Rhesus incompatibility. The risk of still-
birth is increased if the mother has a
severe infection during pregnancy. 
Still＊s disease See rheumatoid arthritis,
juvenile.
stimulant drugs Drugs that increase
brain activity by initiating the release of
noradrenaline (norepinephrine). Stimu-
lants are of 2 types: central nervous
system stimulants (for example,  amfe-
tamines), which increase alertness; and
respiratory stimulants (see  analeptic
drugs), which encourage breathing.
stimulus Anything that directly results
in a change in the activities of the body
as a whole or of any individual part.
stings Stinging animals include scorpi-
ons, some insects, jellyfish, and some
fish (see  venomous bites and stings).
Stinging plants may cause an allergic
skin reaction. (See also poisonous plants.)
STIs See sexually transmitted infections.
stitch A temporary, sudden, sharp pain
in the abdomen or side that occurs dur-
ing severe or unaccustomed exercise.
Stitch is also the common name  for a
suture (see suturing) to close a wound.
St. John＊s wort A herbal remedy derived
from the plant  HYPERICUM PERFORTUM.
Capsules or infusions taken orally are
effective in treating mild depression. St.
John＊s wort is also used in creams for
burns, wounds, and joint problems.
However, St John＊s wort interacts with a
wide variety of other medications. Peo-
ple should not take a St John＊s wort
preparation without first consulting a
doctor or pharmacist.
Stokes每Adams syndrome Recurrent
episodes of temporary loss of conscious-
ness caused by insufficient blood flow
from the heart to the brain. This is due to
irregularity of the heartbeat (see arrhyth-
mia, cardiac) or to complete heart block.
Most people with the syndrome are fit-
ted with a pacemaker to prevent attacks.
stoma A term meaning mouth or orifice.
A stoma can be created surgically in the
abdominal wall  (see  colostomy;  ileost-
omy) to allow the intestine to empty into
a bag or pouch on the surface of the skin.
stomach A hollow, bag-like organ of the
digestive system located  in the left side
of the abdomen under the diaphragm.
Food enters the stomach from the
oesophagus and exits into the duodenum. 
The sight and smell of food, and its
arrival in the stomach, stimulate gastric
STEVENS每JOHNSON SYNDROME STOMACH
S
STETHOSCOPE
Diaphragm of
stethoscope
Tubing527
secretion from the stomach lining. Gas-
tric juice contains pepsin, an enzyme that
breaks down protein;  hydrochloric acid,
which kills bacteria andcreates the opti-
mum pH for pepsin activity; and intrinsic
factor, which is essential for absorption
of vitamin B12 in the small intestine. The
gastric lining also secretes mucus to
stop the stomach digesting itself.
The muscular stomach wall produces
rhythmic contractions that churn the food
and gastric juice to aid digestion. Partly
digested food is squirted into the duo-
denum at regular intervals by stomach
contractions and by relaxation of the
ring of muscle at the stomach outlet.
stomachache Discomfort in the upper
abdomen. (See also indigestion.)
stomach cancer A malignant tumour
that arises from the lining of the stomach.
The exact cause is unknown, but HELICO-
BACTER PYLORI infection is thought to be
linked to increased incidence. Other like-
ly factors include smoking and alcohol
intake; diet may also play a part, in par-
ticular eating large amounts of salted or
pickled foods. Pernicious anaemia, a par-
tial gastrectomy, and belonging to blood
group A also seem to increase the risk.
Stomach cancer rarely affects people
under 40 and is more common in men.
There may also be other symptoms indis-
tinguishable from those of peptic ulcer.
Diagnosis is usually made by gastros-
copy or by a barium X-ray examination. 
The only effective treatment is total gas-
trectomy. In advanced cases in which the
tumour has spread,  radiotherapy  and
anticancer drugs may prolong life.
stomach, disorders of the The stom-
ach may be affected by various disorders,
including gastrointestinal infections, pep-
tic ulcers,  gastritis,  pyloric stenosis,
volvulus, polyps, and stomach cancer. 
stomach imaging See  barium X-ray
examinations.
stomach pump See lavage, gastric.
stomach ulcer A type of peptic ulcer.
stomatitis Any form of inflammation or
ulceration of the mouth. 
stones Small, hard collections of solid
material within the body. (See also cal-
culus, urinary tract; gallstones.)
stool Another word for faeces.
stork mark A small, flat, harmless,
pinkish-red skin blemish found in many
newborn babies. Such marks, which may
be temporary, are a type of  haeman-
gioma and are usually found around the
eyes and at the nape of the neck.
strabismus See squint.
strain Tearing or stretching of  muscle
fibres as a result of suddenly pulling
them too far. There is bleeding into the
damaged area of muscle, causing pain,
swelling, muscle spasm, and bruising. 
Treatment may include applying an ice-
pack, resting the affected part, taking
analgesic drugs, and physiotherapy.
strangulation The constriction, usually
by twisting or compression, of a tube or
passage in the body, blocking blood
flow and interfering with the function of
the affected organ. Strangulation may
occur with a hernia, for example.
Strangulation of the neck causes com-
pression of the jugular veins, preventing
blood from flowing out of the brain, and
compression of the windpipe, which
restricts breathing. The victim loses con-
sciousness, and brain damage and death
from lack of oxygen follow. 
strangury A symptom characterized by
a painful and frequent desire to empty
the bladder, although only a few drops
of urine can be passed. Causes include
STRANGURY STOMACHACHE
S
STOMACH
Oesophagus
Oesophageal
sphincter
Pyloric
sphincter
Duodenum
Ruga
Mucosa
Submucosa
Muscle layers
LOCATION528
prostatitis,  cystitis, bladder cancer (see
bladder tumours), and bladder stones
(see calculus, urinary tract).
strapping The application of adhesive
tape to part of the body to exert pres-
sure and hold a structure in place. 
strawberry naevus A bright red, raised
spot which appears in early infancy. It is
a type of haemangioma.
strep throat A streptococcal infection of
the  throat. It is most common in chil-
dren. The bacteria are spread in droplets
coughed or breathed into the air. 
In some people, the bacteria cause no
symptoms, but others suffer a sore throat,
fever, and enlarged lymph nodes in the
neck. In some cases, the bacterial toxins
produce a rash (see scarlet fever). 
Treatment is usually with a  penicillin
drug. Untreated, strep throat may lead
to glomerulonephritis or rheumatic fever.
streptococcal infections Infections
caused by bacteria of the STREPTOCOCCUS
group. A particular type, haemolyticstrep-
tococci, can cause tonsillitis, strep throat,
scarlet fever, otitis media, pneumonia, ery-
sipelas, and wound infections. Another
type is often responsible for urinary tract
infection, and another can cause bacterial
endocarditis if it enters the bloodstream.
streptokinase A thrombolytic drug used
to dissolve blood clots following a myo-
cardial infarction or pulmonary embolism.
Side effects include nausea, rash,and
cardiac arrhythmias.
streptomycin An antibiotic drug used to
treat a number of uncommon infections,
including  tularaemia, plague, brucellosis,
and glanders. It may damage nerves in
the inner ear, disturbing balance and
causing dizziness, tinnitus, or deafness.
Other side effects are facial numbness,
tingling in the hands, and headache.
stress Any interference that disturbs a
person＊s mental and physical well-being.
Stress may be experienced in response
to a range of physical and emotional
stimuli. When faced with stressful situ-
ations, the body responds by increasing
production of the hormones adrenaline
(epinephrine) and  cortisol, which pro-
duce changes in  heart-rate, blood
pressure, and metabolism to improve
performance. However, at a certain level,
they disrupt a person＊s ability to cope.
Continued exposure to stress often
leads to mental and physical symptoms,
such as anxiety and depression, indiges-
tion, palpitations, and muscular aches
and pains. Post-traumatic stress disorder
is a direct response to a specific stressful
event. (See also relaxation techniques.) 
stress fracture A fracture that occurs as
a result of repetitive jarring of a bone.
Common sites include the metatarsal
bones in the foot (see March fracture),
the tibia or fibula, the neck of the femur,
and the lumbar spine. The main symp-
toms are pain and tenderness at the
fracture site. Diagnosis is by bone imag-
ing. Treatment consists of resting the
affected area for 4每6 weeks. The fracture
may be immobilized in a cast.
stress ulcer An acute peptic ulcer that
develops after  shock, severe burns or
injuries, or during a major illness. Stress
ulcers are usually multiple and are most
common in the stomach. The exact
cause is unknown. Drugs are often given
to severely ill patients in hospital to pre-
vent the development of stress ulcers.
stretcher A frame covered with fabric
that is used in first aid for carrying the
sick, injured, or deceased. 
stretch-mark Another name for stria.
stria Also called a stretch-mark, a line on
the skin caused by thinning and  loss of
elasticity in the dermis. Striae first appear
as red, raised lines. Later they become
purple, eventually fading to shinystreaks. 
Striae often develop on the hips and
thighs during the adolescent growth
spurt, especially in athletic girls. They are
a common feature of pregnancy, occur-
ring on the breasts, thighs, and lower
abdomen. Purple striae are a character-
istic feature of Cushing＊s syndrome. 
Striae are thought to be caused by an
excess of corticosteroid hormones. There
is no means of prevention, but in some
cases laser treatment may be used.
stricture Narrowing of a duct, canal, or
other passage in the body. 
stridor An abnormal breathing sound
caused by narrowing or obstruction of
the  larynx or  trachea. Stridor is most
common in young children. It usually
occurs in  croup. Other causes include
epiglottitis, an inhaled foreign body, hy-
pocalcaemia, and some larynx disorders.
STRAPPING STRIDOR
S529
stroke Damage to part of the brain caused
by an interruption to its blood supply.
The interruption is most often due to the
blockage of a cerebral artery by a blood
clot, which may have formed within the
artery (see  thrombosis), or may have
been carried into the artery in the circu-
lation from a clot elsewhere in the body
(see  embolism). Stroke may also result
from localized haemorrhage due to rup-
ture of a blood vessel in or near the brain.
The incidence of stroke rises with age
and is higher in men. Certain factors in-
crease the risk. The most important are
hypertension and  atherosclerosis (and,
by association, factors such as  smoking
that contribute to these disorders). Other
risk factors are atrial fibrillation, a damaged
heart valve, and a recent  myocardial
infarction; these can cause clots in the
heart which may migrate to the brain. 
Symptoms usually develop abruptly
and, depending on the site, cause, and
extent of brain damage, may include
headache, dizziness, visual disturbance,
and difficulty in swallowing. Sensation,
movement,or function controlled by the
damaged area of the brain is impaired.
Weakness or paralysis on one side of the
body, called  hemiplegia, is a common
effect of a serious stroke. A stroke that
affects the dominant cerebral hemisphere
may cause disturbance of language (see
aphasia). About a third of major strokes
are fatal, a third result in some disabil-
ity, and a third have no lasting ill effects
(see transient ischaemic attack).
In some cases, urgent treatment may
improve the  chances of recovery.  ECG,
CT scanning,chest X-rays,  blood tests,
angiography, and MRI may be used to
investigate the cause and extent of brain
damage. If a stroke is proven by scan to
be due to thrombosis, thrombolytic drugs
may be given.  Anticoagulants may be
given if there is an obvious source of an
embolism, such as atrial fibrillation or a
narrowed carotid  artery. In some cases,
antiplatelet agents such as  aspirin are
given. In most cases, attentionto hydra-
tion and pressure areas, and good nursing
care, are the most important influences
on outcome.  Physiotherapy mayrestore
lost movement or sensation;  speech
therapy may help language disturbances. 
stroma The tissue that forms an organ＊s
framework, as distinct from the functional
tissue (the parenchyma) and the fibrous
outer layer that holds the organ together. 
strongyloidiasis An infestation of the
intestines by the parasitic worm STRONGY-
LOIDES STERCORALIS. It is widespread in
the tropics. Strongyloidiasis is contract-
ed in affected areas by walking barefoot
on soilcontaminated with faeces. Larvae
penetrate the soles, migrating via the
lungs and throat to the intestine. Here
they develop into adults and produce
larvae. Most larvae are passed in the fae-
ces, but some enter the skin around the
anus to begin a new cycle. A person
may be infested for more than 40 years.
The larvae cause itching and red weals
where they enter the skin. In the lungs
they may cause  asthma or  pneumonia.
Heavy intestinal infestation may cause
swelling of the abdomen and diarrhoea.
Occasionally, an infected person with
reduced immunity dies of complica-
tions, such as septicaemia or meningitis. 
Treatment with an  anthelmintic drug,
usually tiabendazole, kills the worms.
strontium A metallic element occurring
in various compounds in certain miner-
als, seawater, and marine plants. 
A radioactive variety, strontium 90, is
produced during nuclear reactions and
may be present in nuclear fallout. Stron-
tium90 accumulates in bone, where the
radiation it emits may cause  leukaemia
and/or  bone tumours. Other forms of
radioactive strontium have been used
to diagnose and treat bone tumours.
strychnine poisoning Strychnine is a
poisonous chemical found in the seeds
of Strychnos species (tropical trees and
shrubs). Its main use is as an ingredient
in some rodent poisons; most cases of
strychnine poisoning occur in children
who accidentally eat such poisons. 
Symptoms begin soon  after ingestion
and include restlessness, stiffness of the
face and neck, increased sensitivity of
hearing, taste, and smell, and photosensi-
tivity, followed by alternating episodes of
seizures and floppiness. Death may occur
from respiratory arrest.
The victim is given intravenous injec-
tions of a  tranquillizer or a barbiturate,
with a muscle-relaxant drug  if needed.
STRYCHNINE POISONING STROKE
Sof the neck may develop. Even uncon-
scious patients may recover, but further
attacks are common and often fatal.
Diagnosis is by CT scanning and angio-
graphy.Treatment includes life-support
procedures and control of blood pressure
to prevent recurrence. Burst or leaking
aneurysms are usually treated by surg-
ery. About half of those people affected
survive, some recover completely, others
have residual disability such as paralysis.
subclavian steal syndrome Recurrent
attacks of blurred or double vision, loss
of coordination, or dizziness caused by
reduced blood flow to the base of the
brain when one arm (usually the left) is
moved. The cause is narrowing of the
arteries that carry blood to the arms,
usually due to  atherosclerosis. Treat-
ment is by arterial reconstructive surgery.
subclinical A term applied to a disor-
der that produces no symptoms or
signs because it is either mild or in the
early stages of development. 
subconjunctival haemorrhage Bleed-
ing under the conjunctiva that is usually
harmless and disappears in a few days
without treatment. 
subconscious A term describing mental
events (such as thoughts) of which one
is temporarily unaware but which can be
recalled under the right circumstances. 
subcutaneous Beneath the skin.
subdural haemorrhage Bleeding into
the space between the outer and middle
layers of the meninges, usually following
head injury. The trapped blood slowly
forms a large clot within the skull that
presses on brain  tissue. The symptoms,
which tend to fluctuate, may include
headache, confusion, drowsiness, and
one-sided weakness or  paralysis. The
interval between the injury and the start
of symptoms varies from days to months.
Diagnosis is by CT scanning or MRI. In
many cases, surgical treatment is need-
ed. This involves drilling burr holes in
the skull (see  craniotomy), so that the
blood can be drained out and damaged
blood vessels repaired. If treatment is
carried out at an early enough stage,
the person usually makes a full recov-
ery.A subdural haemorrhage that is
small and produces few symptoms may
not require any treatment. The affected 
530
Breathing may be maintained by a ven-
tilator. With prompt treatment, recovery
usually occurs in about 24 hours.
stuffy nose See nasal congestion.
stump The end portion of a limb that
remains after amputation.
stupor A state of almost complete  un-
consciousness from which a person can
be aroused only briefly and by vigorous
external stimulation. (See also coma.)
Sturge每Weber syndrome A rare, con-
genital condition that affects the skin and
the brain. Characteristically, a large pur-
ple birthmark (port wine stain) extends
over one side of the face, including the
eye. Malformation of cerebral blood ves-
sels may cause weakness on one side of
the body, progressive mental handicap,
and epilepsy. Glaucoma may develop in
the affected eye, leading to loss of vision.
Seizures can usually becontrolled with
anticonvulsant drugs. In severe cases,
brain surgery may be necessary. 
stuttering A speech disorder in which
there is repeated hesitation and delay in
uttering words, unusual prolongation of
sounds, and repetition of word elements.
Stuttering usually starts before the age
of 8 and may continue into adult life. It is
more common in males, twins, and left-
handed people, and may occur with tics
or  tremors. The severity may be related
to social circumstances. The exact cause
is unknown, although it tends to run in
families. Speech therapy often helps.
St. Vitus＊ dance An outdated term for
Sydenham＊s chorea. 
stye A small, pus-filled  abscess at the 
base of an eyelash, caused by infection. 
subacute A term used for a disease that
runs a course between acute and chronic.
subarachnoid haemorrhage A type of
brain haemorrhage in which a blood ves-
selruptures into the cerebrospinal fluid
that surrounds the brain and spinal
cord. It usually occurs spontaneously
but may follow unaccustomed exercise.
It is most common in people between
35 and 60. The most common cause is a
burst aneurysm (see berry aneurysm). 
An attack may cause loss of conscious-
ness, sometimes preceded by a sudden
violent headache. If the person remains
conscious, symptoms such as  photo-
phobia, nausea, drowsiness, and stiffness
STUFFY NOSE SUBDURAL HAEMORRHAGE
S531
person is usually monitored with regular
scans, and the clot may clear up on its
own. (See also extradural haemorrhage.) 
sublimation In psychoanalytic theory, the
unconscious process by which primitive,
unacceptable impulses are redirected in-
to socially acceptable forms of behaviour.
sublingual A term meaning under the
tongue. Drugs taken sublingually, either
as tablets or spray, are rapidly absorbed
into the bloodstream via the lining of
the mouth. For example, nitrate tablets
are given sublingually to provide rapid
relief of an angina attack.
subluxated tooth A tooth displaced in
its socket as the result of an accident.
The upper front teeth are the most
vulnerable. A subluxated tooth can usu-
ally be manipulated back into position,
andis then immobilized (see  splinting,
dental). If the tooth＊s blood vessels are
torn, root-canal treatment is required.
subluxation Incomplete dislocation of a
joint, in which the surfaces of the bones
remain in partial contact. 
submucous resection An operation to
correct a deviated nasal septum. 
subphrenic abscess An abscess under
the diaphragm.
substance abuse The use of drugs or
other substances for a purpose other
than that which is normally recommen-
ded. Stimulant drugs, solvents, and
glue, are all commonly abused. Prob-
lems may arise due to adverse effects or
from the habit-forming potential of the
substance. (See also drug abuse.)
substrate A substance on which an
enzyme acts.
sucking chest wound An open wound
in the chest wall through which air pas-
ses,  causing the lung on that side to
collapse. Severe breathlessness and a
life-threatening lack of oxygen result.
sucralfate An  ulcer-healing drug used
to treat peptic ulcer. Possible side effects
are constipation and abdominal pain. 
suction The removal of unwanted fluid or
semi-fluid material from the body with
a syringe and hollow needle or with an
intestinal tube and a mechanical pump. 
suction lipectomy A cosmetic proced-
ure, also called  liposuction, that is used
in body contour surgery.
sudden death See death, sudden.
sudden infant death syndrome The
sudden, unexpected death of an infant
that cannot be explained.
Possible risk factors include: laying
the baby  face-down to sleep; overheat-
ing; parental smoking after the birth;
prematurity and lowbirth weight;and
poor socioeconomic background. 
Preventive measures include: ensuring
that the baby sleeps on its back at the
foot of the cot; regulating the baby＊s
temperature (using the same amount of
clothing and blankets that an adult
would need); and stopping smoking.
Sudeck＊s atrophy Swelling and loss of
use of a hand or foot after a fracture or
other injury. Treatment includes eleva-
tion of the affected hand or foot, gentle
exercise, and heat treatment. Full recov-
ery is usual within about 4 months. 
SUDECK＊S ATROPHY SUBLIMATION
S
SUBDURAL HAEMORRHAGE
NORMAL
SUBDURAL HAEMORRHAGE
Skull Skull
Skull
Blood clot
compressing
brain and
arachnoid
Scalp
Dura
mater
Dura mater
Arachnoid
LOCATION
Brain532
suffocation A condition in which there
is a lack of oxygen due to obstruction to
the passage of air into the lungs. (See
also asphyxia; choking; strangulation.)
sugar See carbohydrates.
suicide The act of intentionally killing
oneself. Suicide results froma person＊s
reaction to a perceivedly overwhelming
problem, such as social isolation, death
of a loved one, serious physical illness,
or financial problems. It is often the re-
sult of a psychiatric illness, such as severe
depression or schizophrenia.
Suicide is most common among the
elderly. More men than women commit
suicide, although women attempt the
act more often (see suicide, attempted).
The most common method is poisoning,
usually by taking a drug overdose or by
inhaling car exhaust fumes. 
suicide, attempted Any deliberate act
of self-harm that is or is believed to be
life-threatening but that in effect proves
nonfatal. Attempted suicide is more
common in women and most common
in the 15每30 age group. The rate is high-
est in people with personality disorders
and in those who live in deprived urban
areas or have alcohol or drug problems.
Common precipitating factors include
the death of a loved one, financial wor-
ries, or severe loss of any kind that
results in depression. The most common
method is drug overdose.
Urgent treatment is needed for  drug
poisoning. Longer-term therapy aims to
provide support and treat depression.
sulfasalazine A drug used to relieve
inflammation in  Crohn＊s disease  and
ulcerative colitis. It may cause nausea,
headache, fever, and loss of appetite.
sulfinpyrazone A drug that reduces the
frequency of attacks of gout. Side effects
include nausea and abdominal pain.
sulindac A  nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drug (NSAID) used to relieve joint
pain and stiffness in various types of arth-
ritis and acute  gout. Side effects are as
for other NSAIDs.
sulphasalazine See sulfasalazine.
sulphinpyrazone See sulfinpyrazone.
sulphonamide drugs A group of anti-
bacterial drugs that has largely been
superseded by more effective and less
toxic alternatives.
sulphur A mineral that is a constituent of
vitamin B1 (see vitamin B complex) and
several essential amino acids. In the body,
it is needed for the manufacture of col-
lagen and is a constituent of keratin. It is
used in the form of a cream to treat acne.
sulpiride An antipsychotic drug used in
the treatment of  schizophrenia and
Gilles de la Tourette＊s syndrome.
sumatriptan A  serotonin agonist drug
that relieves acute attacks of migraine,
especially those that have not responded
to  analgesics; it is particularly effective
in treating cluster headaches. Sumatrip-
tan may cause chest pain and tightness,
flushing, dizziness, and weakness.
sunburn Inflammation of the skin caused
by overexposure to the sun. The  ultra-
violet light in sunlight may destroy cells
in the outer layer of the skin and dam-
age tiny blood vessels beneath.
Fair-skinned people are most suscep-
tible. The affected skin turns red and
tender and may become blistered. The
dead skin cells are later shed by peeling. 
Calamine  lotion soothes the burned
skin.  Analgesic drugs may be taken to
relieve discomfort. A high protection fac-
tor sunscreen helps to prevent sunburn.
Severe sunburn in childhood increases
the risk of skin cancer in later life.
sunlight, adverse effects of Problems
resulting from overexposure to sunlight.
Fair-skinned people are more suscepti-
ble. Short-term overexposure causes
sunburn and, in intense heat, can result
in heat exhaustion or heatstroke. Repeat-
ed overexposure over a long period can
cause premature aging of the skin and
solar  keratoses. It increases the risk of
skin cancer. Protection of the skin with
sunscreens helps to prevent sun damage.
Photosensitivity is an abnormal sensitiv-
ity to sunlight, resulting in a rash.
Exposure to sunlight can affect the
eyes, causing irritation of the conjunctiva,
actinic keratopathy, or pterygium. Good
sunglasses help to prevent eye problems.
sunscreens Preparations that help to
protect the skin from the harmful effects
of sunlight. 
sunstroke A common form of heatstroke. 
suntan Darkening of the skin after expo-
sure to sunlight. Specialized cells in the
epidermis respond to ultraviolet light by
SUFFOCATION SUNTAN
S533
producing the pigment  melanin. (See
also sunlight, adverse effects of; sunburn.) 
superego The part of the personality,
as described in  psychoanalytic theory,
that is responsible for maintaining a
person＊s  standards of behaviour. Popu-
larly termed the ※conscience§, the
superego arises as a result of a child
incorporating the moral views of those
in authority (usually parents). 
superficial Situated near the surface.
superinfection A second  infection that
occurs during the course of an existing
infection. The term usually refers to an
infection by a microorganism that is
resistant to drugs being used against
the original infection. 
superiority complex An individual＊s
exaggerated and unrealistic belief that
he or she is better than other people. In
modern psychoanalytic theory, a superi-
ority complex is considered to be a
compensation for unconscious feelings
of inadequacy or low self-esteem. 
supernumerary A term meaning more
than the normal number. 
supernumerary teeth One or more
teeth in excess of the usual number.
These teeth are usually extracted.
supination The act of turning the body
to a supine position (lying on the back
with the face upward) or of turning the
hand to a palm forward position. The
opposite of supination is pronation.
suppository A solid medical prepara-
tion, of cone or bullet shape, designed
to be placed in the rectum to dissolve.
Suppositories are used to treat rectal
disorders such as  haemorrhoids or
proctitis. They may also be used to soft-
en faeces and stimulate defaecation. In
addition, suppositories may be used to
administer drugs into the general circu-
lation, via blood vessels in the rectum, if
vomiting is likely to prevent absorption
after oral administration or if the drug
would cause irritation of the stomach.
suppuration The formation or discharge
of pus. 
suprarenal glands Another name for
the adrenal glands.
supraspinatus syndrome See painful
arc syndrome. 
supraventricular tachycardia An ab-
normally fast but regular heart-rate that
occurs in episodes lasting for several
hours or days. Supraventricular tachy-
cardia occurs when abnormal electrical
impulses that arise in the atria of the
heart take control of the heartbeat from
the  sinoatrial node. Symptoms include
palpitations, breathlessness, chest pain,
or fainting (see Stokes每Adams syndrome).
Diagnosis is by an ECG. An attack can
sometimes be terminated by Valsalva＊s
manoeuvre or by drinking cold water.
Recurrent attacks are treated with anti-
arrhythmic drugs. Rarely, the condition
may require application of an electric
shock to the heart (see defibrillation).
surfactant A substance, such as a soap
or emulsifier, that reduces surface ten-
sion. Pulmonary surfactant is secreted by
the alveoli in the lungs, preventing them
from collapsing during exhalation, and
is absent in babies born significantly
prematurely. This deficiency causes
breathing difficulties, and the infant
needs artificial ventilation and the admin-
istration of an artificial surfactant.
surfer＊s nodules Multiple bony out-
growths on the foot bones and on the
bony prominence just below the knee. 
surgery The treatment of disease, injury,
or other disorders by direct physical inter-
vention, or those aspects of medicine that
deal withthe study, diagnosis, and man-
agement of disorders treated in this way.
surgical spirit A liquid preparation,
consisting mainly of ethyl alcohol, that
has a soothing and hardening effect
when applied to the skin. It may be
used before injections as an antiseptic. 
surrogacy The agreement by a woman
to become pregnant and give birth to a
child with the understanding that she
will surrender the child after birth to the
contractual parents. Surrogacy may be
accomplished by  artificial insemination
or by in vitro fertilization.
susceptibility A total or partial vulner-
ability to an infection or disorder. 
suture A type of  joint, found only be-
tween the bones of the skull, in which the
adjacent bones are mobile during birth
but then become so closely and firmly
joined by a layer of connective tissue that
movement between them is impossible.
The term suture is also used to refer
to a surgical stitch (see suturing).
SUTURE SUPEREGO
S534
suturing The closing of a surgical inci-
sion or a wound by sutures (stitches) to
promote healing. This may be done by
means of a single stitch under the skin
(subcuticular) or by using individual
stitches (interrupted). Some materials
used in suturing, such as catgut, eventu-
ally dissolve in the body; skin sutures
made of other materials are removed
about 1每2 weeks after insertion.
swab A wad of absorbent material used
to apply antiseptics or soak up body flu-
ids during surgery, or to obtain a sample
of bacteria from an infected patient. 
swallowing The process by which food
or liquid is conveyed from the mouth to
the stomach via the oesophagus. Once
food has been chewed and mixed with
saliva to form a bolus, the tongue push-
es the bolus to the back of the mouth
and the voluntary muscles in the palate
push it into the throat. The rest of the
swallowing process occurs by a series of
reflexes. Entry of food into the throat
causes the epiglottis to tilt down to seal
the trachea and the soft palate to move
back in order to close off the naval cavi-
ty.The throat muscles push the food
into the oesophagus.Waves of contrac-
tion (peristalsis) along the oesophagus
propel the food towards the stomach.
swallowing difficulty A common symp-
tomwith various possible causes,
including a foreign object in the throat;
insufficient production of saliva (see
mouth, dry); a disorder of the oesophagus
such as  oesophageal stricture; pressure
on the oesophagus, for examplefrom a
goitre; a nervous system disorder such as
myasthenia gravis or stroke; or a psycho-
logical problem such as globus hystericus.
Investigations of swallowing difficulty
may include oesophagoscopy or barium
swallow (see barium X-ray examinations).
Treatment depends on the cause. 
swamp fever Another name for  lepto-
spirosis. The term is also sometimes
applied to malaria. 
sweat glands Structures deep within the
skin that produce sweat, which is mainly
water with some dissolved substances,
including salt. There are 2 types of sweat
glands: eccrine glands, which are most
numerous and open directly on to the
skin surface, and apocrine glands, which
develop at puberty. Apocrine glands,
which open into a hair follicle, occur only
SUTURING
S
SWALLOWING
FOOD IN MOUTH
Soft palate
Food bolus
Tongue
Trachea
FOOD IN THROAT
Epiglottis in
raised position
Oesophagus
Soft palate
moved back
Bolus
Trachea sealed
Tilted
epiglottis
Oesophagus
SWEAT GLANDS
SUTURING
SUBCUTICULAR STITCH
INTERRUPTED STITCHES
Skin
Wound
Stitch
Skin
Wound
Stitch535
in hairy areas, particularly the armpits,
pubic region, and around the anus.
The sweat glands are controlled by the
autonomic nervous system. The glands
are usually stimulated to keep the body
cool, but anxiety or fear can also cause
sweating. Sweat is odourless until bac-
teria act upon it, producing body odour.
A common disorder of the sweat
glands is  prickly heat. Other disorders
include hyperhidrosis and hypohidrosis.
sweating The process by which the body
cools itself. (See also sweat glands.)
sweeteners, artificial See  artificial
sweeteners.
swimmer＊s ear A common name for
otitis externa.
sycosis barbae Inflammation of the
beard area due to infection of the hair
follicles, usually with  STAPHYLOCOCCUS
AUREUS bacteria contracted from in-
fected razors or towels. Pus-filled
blisters appear around the follicles. Treat-
mentis usually with antibiotic drugs.
Sydenham＊s chorea A rare childhood
disorder of the  central nervous system
that causes involuntary jerky movements
of the head, face, limbs, and fingers. Vol-
untary movements are clumsy, and the
limbs become floppy. The disorder usu-
ally follows an attack of rheumatic fever.
Sydenham＊s chorea usually clears up
after 2每3 months and has no long-term
adverse effects. 
sympathectomy An operation in which
the ganglia (nerve terminals) of sympa-
thetic nerves are destroyed to interrupt
the nerve pathway. This may be per-
formed to improve blood supply to a
limb (as a treatment for peripheral vas-
cular disease) or to relieve chronic pain,
for example causalgia.
sympathetic nervous system One of
the 2 divisions of the autonomic nervous
system. In conjunction with the other
division (the parasympathetic nervous
system), this system controls manyof
the involuntary activities of the body＊s
glands and organs.
symphysis A type of  joint in which 2
bones are firmly joined by tough carti-
lage. Such joints occur between the
vertebrae; between the pubic bones at
the front of the pelvis; and between the
upper and middle parts of the sternum.
symptom An indication of a disease or
disorder that is noticed by the sufferer.
By contrast, the indications that a doc-
tor notes are called signs. 
symptothermal method See  contra-
ception, natural methods of.
synaesthesia A condition in which stim-
ulation of one of the senses (by a sound,
for example) produces an additional
response, such as the appearance of a
colour in addition to the normal per-
ception associated with that stimulus. 
synapse A junction between2  neurons
across which a signal can pass. At a
synapse, the 2 neurons do not come
directly into contact but are separated
by a gap called the synaptic cleft. When
an electrical signal passing along a neu-
ron reaches a synapse, it causes the
release of a chemical called a  neuro-
transmitter. The neurotransmitter travels
across the synaptic cleft to the surface
membrane of the next neuron, where it
changes the electrical potential of the
membrane. Signals can be transmitted
across a synapse in one direction only. 
Most drugs affecting the nervous sys-
tem work as a result of their effects on
synapses. Such drugs may affect the
release of neurotransmitters,or they
may modify theireffects.
syncope The medical term for fainting.
syndactyly A  congenital defect in which 
2 or more fingers or toes are joined. 
SYNDACTYLY
S
SWEAT GLANDS
Hair Sweat droplet
Sweat
gland
ECCRINE SWEAT GLAND IN SKIN
SWEATING536
Syndactyly is often inherited and is more
common in males. In mild cases, the
affected fingers or toes are joined only
by a web of skin. In more serious cases,
the  bones of adjacent digits are fused.
Surgery to separate the affected digits
may be performed in early childhood.
syndrome A group of symptoms and/or
signs that, occurring together, consti-
tutes a particular disorder. 
synovectomy Surgical removal of the
membrane lining a joint capsule to treat
recurrent or persistent synovitis, usually
due to severe rheumatoid arthritis. 
synovitis Inflammation of the membrane
lining a joint capsule. The condition
may be acute, in which case it is usually
caused by an attack of arthritis, injury,
or infection; or chronic, as in a disorder
such as  rheumatoid arthritis. The affec-
ted joint becomes swollen, painful, and
often warm and red. To find the cause,
joint aspiration or biopsy may be needed.
Symptoms are relieved by rest, sup-
porting the joint with a splint or cast,
analgesics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs, and, occasionally, a  corticosteroid
injection. Chronic synovitis may be trea-
ted by synovectomy. 
synovium A membrane that lines the
capsule surrounding a movable  joint.
The synovium also forms a sheath for
certain tendons of the hands and feet.
The membrane secretes synovial fluid,
which lubricates the joint or tendon. The
synovium can become inflamed; in a
joint this is known as synovitis, in a ten-
don sheath it is known as tenosynovitis. 
syphilis An infection caused by TREPON-
EMA PALLIDUM bacteria and spread
through sexual intercourse or other inti-
mate body contact, or, less commonly,
from mother to fetus during pregnancy. 
Following sexual infection, the organ-
ism spreads rapidly via the bloodstream
and lymphatic system. The first symptom
is a sore (chancre) that appears on the
genitals, anus, rectum, lips, throat, or
fingers and heals in 4每8 weeks. A rash
then develops, which may be transient,
recurrent, or may last for months. Other
possible symptoms include lymph node
enlargement, headache, bone pain,loss
of appetite, fever, and fatigue. Thickened,
grey or pink patches may develop on
moist areas of skin and are highly infec-
tious. Meningitis may also develop. 
Following this symptomatic phase, the
disease becomes latent for a few years,
or sometimes indefinitely. A few untrea-
tedcases proceed, eventually, to a final
stage characterized by widespread tissue
destruction. This may be accompanied
by cardiovascular syphilis, which affects
the aorta and leads to  aneurysm and
heart-valve  disease;  neurosyphilis, with
progressive brain damage and paralysis;
and tabes dorsalis of the spinal cord.
Signs of congenital infection include a
rash, persistent snuffles, bone abnorma-
lities, jaundice, and enlargement of the
liver and spleen.  Keratitis, arthritis, a
characteristic flat face, peg-shaped teeth,
and mental handicap may appear later
in childhood.
Diagnosis is by examination of chancre
serum or by blood tests. All forms of
syphilis are treated with  antibacterial
drugs. Organ damage already caused by
the disease cannot be reversed.
Practising safer sex can help to prevent
syphilis infection. People with syphilis
are infectious in the early stages but
not in the latent and final stages.
syphilis, nonvenereal An infection due
to  TREPONEMA PALLIDUM bacteria that is
SYNDROME SYPHILIS, NONVENEREAL
S
SYNOVIUM
Bone
Synovium
Synovial
fluid
Articular
cartilage
Ligament
TYPICALJOINT537
spread by nonsexual means, such as
through broken skin or saliva. It occurs
mainly in the Middle East and Africa.
Treatment is with antibacterial drugs. 
syringe An instrument that is commonly
used with a needle for injecting fluid
into, or withdrawing fluid from, a body
cavity, blood vessel, or tissue.
syringe driver A portable device used
to provide continuous pain relief in
conditions such as cancer. The  syringe
driver delivers a certain amount of an
analgesic (painkiller) over a set period
of time. It is attached to a syringe,
which pumps the drug, via a tube,
through a needle inserted into the skin.
syringing of ears The flushing out of
excess  earwax or a foreign body from
the outer ear canal by introducing water
from a syringe into the ear canal. 
syringomyelia A rare, progressive con-
dition, usually congenital, in which a
cavity forms in the brainstem or in the
spinal cord at neck level and gradually
expands, filling with cerebrospinal fluid.
Symptoms usually appear in early adult-
hood and include lack of temperature or
pain sensation, wasting of muscles in the
neck, shoulders, arms, and hands, and
some loss of the sense of touch. Later,
there is difficulty in moving the legs and
controlling the bladder and bowel. 
There is no drug treatment. Surgery can
relieve pressure in the central cavity to
prevent further enlargement, or alterna-
tively, decompress the distended spinal
cord (see decompression, spinal canal).
system A group of interconnected or
interdependent organs with a common
function, as in the digestive system. 
systemic A term applied to something
that affects the whole body rather than a
specific part of it. For example, fever is 
a systemic symptom, whereas swelling
is a localized symptom. The term sys-
temic is also applied to the part of the
blood circulation that supplies all parts
of the body except the lungs.
systemic lupus erythematosus See
lupus erythematosus.
systemic sclerosis Also known as scle-
roderma, a rare  autoimmune disorder
that can affect many organs and tissues,
particularly the skin, arteries, kidneys,
lungs, heart, gastrointestinal tract, and
joints. The condition is 3 times as com-
mon in women and is most likely to
appear between the age of 30 and 50.
The number and severity of symptoms
varies. The most common symptom is
Raynaud＊s phenomenon. Also common
are changes in the skin, especially of the
face and fingers, which becomes shiny,
tight, and thickened, leading to difficulty
with movements. Other parts of the body
may also be affected, leading to difficulty
in swallowing, shortness of breath, palpi-
tations, high blood pressure, joint pain,
or muscle weakness. Progression of scle-
rodermais  often rapid in the first few
years and then slows down or even stops.
In a minority of people, degeneration is
rapid, and leads to death from heart fail-
ure, respiratory failure, or kidney failure.
There is no cure  for scleroderma, but
many of the symptoms can be relieved. 
systole A period of muscular contraction
of a chamber of the heart that alternates
with a resting period known as diastole. 
SYSTOLE SYRINGE
S538
tabes dorsalis A rare complication of
untreated syphilis that appears years after
infection. The condition causes abnor-
malities of sensation, sharp pains,
incoordination, and incontinence.
tachycardia An adult heart rate of over
100 beats per minute. The average heart
rate is 72每78 beats per minute. Tachy-
cardia occurs in healthy people during
exercise. At rest, it may be due to fever,
anxiety, hyperthyroidism, coronaryartery
disease, high caffeine intake, or treatment
involving anticholinergic or diureticdrugs.
There are various types of tachycardia,
which originate in different areas of the
heart; the types include atrial fibrillation,
sinus  tachycardia, supraventricular tachy-
cardia, and ventricular tachycardia.
tachypnoea An abnormally fast rate of
breathing, which may be caused by exer-
cise, anxiety, or lung or cardiac disorders.
T＊ai chi A Chinese exercise system based
on a series of over 100 postures between
which slow, continuous movements are
made. The aim is to exercise the muscles
and integrate mind and body. 
talipes A birth defect (commonly called
club-foot) in which the foot is twisted
out of shape or position. The cause may
be pressure on the feet from the mother＊s
uterus, or a genetic factor. The most
common form is an equinovarus defor-
mity, in which the heel turns inwards
and the rest of the foot bends down and
inwards. It is treated by repeated
manipulation of the foot and ankle,
starting soon after birth. A plaster cast,
splint, or strapping may be used to hold
the foot in position. If this is not suc-
cessful, surgery will be needed.
talus The square-shaped foot bone that
forms the ankle joint together with the
tibia and fibula.
tamoxifen An  anticancer drug that is
used to treat certain forms of breast can-
cer, and, sometimes, to treat some types
of  infertility. It may cause nausea, vomit-
ing, hot flushes, swollen ankles, and
irregular vaginal bleeding.
tampon A plug of absorbent material
inserted into a wound or body opening to
soak up blood or other secretions. The
term commonly refers to a vaginal tam-
pon, used to absorb menstrual blood.
tamponade Compression of the heart by
fluid within the pericardium, which may
cause breathlessness and collapse. Caus-
es include pericarditis, complications after
heart surgery, or a chest injury. A diag-
nosis is made by echocardiography, and
the fluid is removed through a needle.
tamsulosin An alpha-blocker drug used
for the treatment of urinary symptoms
due to an enlarged prostate gland (see
prostate, enlarged). Side effects include
low blood pressure, drowsiness, dry
mouth, and gastrointestinal disturbances.
tan See suntan.
tannin Also known as tannic acid, a
chemical that occurs in many plants, par-
ticularly tea. It may cause constipation,
and large amounts cause liver damage.
tantrum An outburst of bad behaviour,
common in toddlers, usually indicating
frustration and anger.
tapeworm infestation Tapeworms (ces-
todes)are  ribbon-shaped worms that
infest the intestines of humans and ani-
mals. They are usually acquired by
eating undercooked meat or fish. Tape-
worms from beef, pork, and fish usually
only cause mild abdominal discomfort
or diarrhoea. However, if eggs of pork
worms are ingested, the hatched larvae
burrow into tissues to form cysts. This
leads to cysticerosis, the symptoms of
which are muscle pain and convulsions.
Rarely, fish tapeworms cause  anaemia.
Dwarf tapeworms, common in the trop-
ics, can cause diarrhoea and abdominal
discomfort. Tapeworms acquired from
dogs cause hydatid disease. A diagnosis
is made from the presence of worm seg-
ments or eggs in the faeces. Treatment
is with anthelmintic drugs.
tardive dyskinesia Abnormal, uncon-
trolled movements, mainly of the face,
tongue, mouth, and neck. Tardive dyski-
nesia may be caused by prolonged use
of  antipsychotic drugs, and is distinct
from parkinsonism.
TABES DORSALIS TARDIVE DYSKINESIA
T
Tbuds from  stomatitis, mouth cancer, or
radiotherapy to the mouth; or damage
to nerves that carry taste sensations.
tattooing The introduction of permanent
colours under the skin surface, usually to
create a picture. Small tattoos can be
removed by cutting out the tattoo and
stitching the wound edges together. Lar-
ger tattoos can sometimes be removed
by dermabrasion or by lasertreatment.
taxanes A group of anticancerdrugs used
to treat certain cancers, such as ovarian
cancer (see ovary, cancer of) and breast
cancer. They work by preventing the
growth of cancer cells. Common taxane
drugs include paclitaxel and docetaxel.
Tay每Sachs disease A serious inherited
metabolic disorder (see metabolism, in-
born errors of) that causes premature
death. The cause is deficiency of the
enzyme hexosaminidase A, which results
in a buildup in the brain of a harmful
substance. Symptoms usually appear af-
ter age 6 months and include blindness,
paralysis, and seizures leading to death.
Diagnosis is made by enzyme analysis of
white blood cells. It is now largely pre-
vented by  genetic
counselling of high-
risk groups.
TB An abbreviation
for tuberculosis.
T-cell A class of
lymphocyte.
tears The watery,
salty secretion that
is produced by the
lacrimal glands, part
of the  lacrimal ap-
paratus of the  eye.
Tears keep the cor-
nea and conjunctiva
moist to maintain
transparency of the
cornea and prevent
ulcers; aid blinking;
and wash away for-
eign particles. Tear production increases
in response to eye irritation and emotion.
tears, artificial Preparations to supple-
ment tear production in disorders that
cause dry eye, such as keratoconjunctivitis
sicca, and to relieve irritation.
technetium A radioactive element used
in radionuclide scanning.
tarsalgia Pain in the rear part of the foot,
usually associated with flat-feet.
tarsorrhaphy Surgery in which the upper
and lower eyelids are partially or com-
pletely sewn together. Tarsorrhaphy may
be used as part of the treatment of
corneal ulcer, or to protect the corneas
of people who cannot close their eyes or
those with  exophthalmos. The eyelids
are later cut apart and allowed to open.
tarsus The 7 bones that make up the
back of the foot and the ankle.
tartar See calculus, dental.
taste One of the 5 senses. Taste can dis-
tinguish only between sweet, salt, sour,
and bitter, but in combination with the
sense of  smell, many different flavours
can be distinguished. Tastes are detect-
ed by structures called taste buds.
taste bud One of 10,000 specialized
structures located mainly on the  tongue,
with some at the back of the throat and on
the palate. Each bud contains about 25
sensory receptor cells, with tiny taste hairs
that respond to food and drink. Taste buds
on different parts of the tongue sense the
4 basic tastes: bitter, sour, salty, and sweet.
taste, loss of Loss of the sense of taste,
usually as a result of the loss of the
sense of smell. The most common cause
is inflammation of the nasal passages.
Other causes of loss of taste include
any condition that causes a dry mouth
(see mouth, dry); natural degeneration
of the  taste buds; damage to the taste
539
TECHNETIUM TARSALGIA
T
Surface cell on tongue
TASTE BUD
Taste hair Tongue
Receptor cell
Supporting cell
Nerve fibre
LOCATION540
teeth Hard, bone-like projections set in
the jaws and surrounded by the gums.
The teeth are used for mastication, help
to form speech, and give shape to the
face. At the centre of each tooth is the
pulp, which contains blood vessels and
nerves and is surrounded by hard den-
tine. The part of the tooth above the
gum, the crown, is covered by enamel,
the hardest substance in the body. 
The roots of the tooth, which fit into the
jawbone, are covered by bone-like
cementum. Humans have 32 permanent
teeth, which erupt after the  primary
teeth are lost. These teeth comprise
chisel-shaped, biting incisors; sharp,
pointed canines; grinding premolars;
and larger grinding molars.
teeth, care of See oral hygiene.
teething The period when a baby cuts
his or her primary teeth (see eruption of
teeth). While teething, a baby may be
irritable, fretful, clingy, have difficulty
sleeping, and may cry more than usual.
Symptoms may be relieved by the use
of painkilling gels that are rubbed on
the gums, or liquid preparations. 
telangiectasia An increase in the size
of small blood vessels beneath the sur-
face of an area of skin, causing redness
and a ※broken veins§ appearance. It is
most common on the nose and cheeks.
There may be no obvious cause, or the
condition may be due to many years of
excessive alcohol consumption, rosacea,
overexposure to sunlight, or a connective
tissue disease such as dermatomyositis.
Telangiectasia is not a cause for con-
cern, but the veins can beremoved in
some cases by electrodesiccation (elec-
trical destruction of  the upper layers of
the skin). (See also spider naevus.)
temazepam A  benzodiazepine drug that
is used to  treat  insomnia and also as a
drug of abuse.
temperature The degree of hotness of a
body or substance. In the human body,
the temperature must be maintained at
around 37∼C for optimum functioning.
Body temperature is maintained by the
hypothalamus, which monitors blood
temperature and activates mechanisms
to compensate for changes. When body
temperature falls, shivering creates heat
by muscle activity, and constriction of
blood vessels in the skin minimizes
heat loss. When the body temperature
rises,  sweating results in cooling, and
dilation of blood vessels in the skin
increases heat loss.
temperature method See  contracep-
tion, natural methods of.
temporal A medical term meaning of or
near the temples or a temple.
temporal arteritis An uncommon dis-
ease of older people in which the wallsof
the arteries in the scalp over the temples
become inflamed. Other arteries in the
body may also be affected. The cause is
unknown, but the condition is often
associated with polymyalgia rheumatica.
Symptoms may include severe headache
on 1 or both sides, scalp tenderness, a
low fever, and poor appetite. In about
half of the cases,the arteries supplying
the eyes are affected, which may cause
sudden blindness if left untreated.
Diagnosis of temporal arteritis is made
by  blood tests (including  ESR) and, in
some cases, by a biopsy of the temporal
artery. Treatment involves the use of a
corticosteroid drug. If this is not suc-
cessful,  immunosuppressants may be
given. The disease usually clears up
within 2 years.
TEETH TEMPORAL ARTERITIS
T
TEETH
Enamel Crown
Dentine
Gum
(gingiva)
Pulp
Periodontal
ligament
Cementum
Jawbone
Nerve
STRUCTURE OF A TOOTH
Blood
vessel
Root541
temporal lobe epilepsy A form of
epilepsy in which abnormal electrical dis-
charges occur in the temporal lobe (most
of the lower side of each half of the cere-
brum) in the  brain. The usual cause is
damage to the temporal lobe, which
may be due to a birth injury, head injury,
brain tumour,  brain abscess, or  stroke.
Attacks of this form of epilepsy cause
dreamlike states, unpleasant  hallucina-
tions of smell or taste, the perception of
an illusory scene, or d谷ja vu. There may
also be grimacing, rotation of the head
and eyes, and sucking and chewing
movements. The affected person may
have no memory of activities during an
attack, which can last for minutes or
hours. Sometimes, the seizure develops
into a grand mal seizure. Diagnosis and
drug treatment is the same as for other
forms of epilepsy.
temporomandibular joint The joint
between the mandible (lower jaw bone)
and the skull.
temporomandibular joint syndrome
Pain and other symptoms affecting the
head, jaw, and face, thought to result
when the temporomandibular joints and
the muscles and ligaments attached to
them do not work together correctly.
Causes include spasm of the chewing
muscles, an incorrect bite (see maloc-
clusion), jaw, head, or neck injuries, or
osteoarthritis. Common symptoms include
headaches, tenderness of the jaw mus-
cles, and aching facial pain. Treatment
involves correction of any underlying
abnormality,  analgesic drugs, and, in
some cases, injection of  corticosteroid
drugs into the joint.
tenderness Pain or abnormal sensitivity
in a part of the body when it is pressed
or touched.
tendinitis Inflammation of a tendon,
usually caused by injury or overuse.
Symptomsof  tendinitis include pain,
tenderness,and restricted movement.
Treatment is with  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), ultrasound
treatment, orinjection of a corticosteroid
drug around the tendon.
tendolysis An operation performed to
free a  tendon from adhesions that limit
its movement. The adhesions are usu-
ally caused by tenosynovitis.
tendon A fibrous cord that joins muscle
to bone or muscle to muscle. Tendons
are strong and flexible, but inelastic.
Those in the hands, wrists, and feet are
enclosed in synovial sheaths (fibrous
capsules) that secrete a lubricating fluid.
tendon release See tendolysis.
tendon repair Surgery to join the cut
or torn ends of, or to replace, a tendon.
tendon rupture A complete tear in a
tendon. A tendon may rupture when the
muscle to which it is attached contracts
suddenly and powerfully, such as during
vigorous exercise. Rupture may also be
due to an injury or joint disorder such
as rheumatoid arthritis. Symptoms
include a snapping sensation, impaired
movement, pain, and swelling. Diagnosis
is usually obvious from the symptoms.
Surgery to repair the tendon may be
needed. In some cases, the tendon may
heal if immobilized in a plaster cast.
tendon transfer Surgery to reposition
a  tendon so that it makes a muscle per-
form a different function. The tendon is
cut from its original point of attachment
and reattached elsewhere, making the
muscle lie in a different position. The
procedure may be used to  treat  talipes
or permanent muscle injury or paralysis.
tenesmus A feeling of incomplete empty-
ing of the bowel in which an urge to pass
faeces accompanies ineffective straining.
It may be a symptom of inflammation
or of a tumour (see colon, cancer of).
TENESMUS TEMPORAL LOBE EPILEPSY
T
TENDON
Bone
Tendon
Muscle
Tendon542
tennis elbow Pain and tenderness on
the outside of the elbow and in the back
of the forearm. Commonly called epicon-
dylitis, it is caused by inflammation of
the  tendon that attaches the muscles
that straighten the fingers and wrist to the
humerus. Treatment consists of resting
the arm, applying  ice-packs, and taking
analgesicdrugs or  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Ultrasound
treatment, injection of a  corticosteroid
drug, or surgery are sometimes needed. 
tenosynovitis Inflammation of thelin-
ing of the sheath that surrounds a
tendon. The usual cause is excessive fric-
tion  caused by repetitive movements;
bacterial infection is a rare cause. The
hands and wrists are most often affect-
ed. Symptoms include pain, tenderness,
and swelling over the tendon. Treatment
is with  nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) or a  local injection of a
corticosteroid drug. However, if  infection
is the cause, antibiotic drugs  are pre-
scribed. A splint to immobilize the joint,
or surgery, may also be needed.
tenovaginitis Inflammation or thicken-
ing of the fibrous wall of the sheath that
surrounds a tendon.
TENS Abbreviation for transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation, a method
of pain relief. Minute electrical impulses,
which block pain messages to the brain,
are relayed from an impulse generator
to electrodes attached to the skin in the
area of the pain. TENS can help relieve
chronic pain not controlled by analgesic
drugs and may be used in childbirth.
tension A feeling of mental and physical
strain associated with  anxiety. Muscle
tension may cause headaches and stiff-
ness in muscles. Persistent tension is
related to generalized anxiety disorder.
(See also stress.)
teratogen A physical, chemical, or bio-
logical agent, such as radiation, the
drug  thalidomide, and the  rubella virus,
that causes abnormalities in a develop-
ing embryo or fetus.
teratoma A primary  tumour consisting
of cells totally unlike those normally
found in that part of the body.
terbinafine An antifungal drug used to
treat fungal nail or skin infections. Side
effects are rare with topical use but may
include local irritation. Taken as tablets,
the drug may cause nausea, abdominal
pain, and, occasionally a rash.
terbutaline A bronchodilator drug used
to treat asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, and also to prevent
premature labour. Possible adverse ef-
fects include nervousness, restlessness,
tremor, nausea, and palpitations.
terminal care See dying, care of the.
termination of pregnancy See  abor-
tion, induced.
testicle See testis.
testicular feminization syndrome A
rare inherited condition in which a gen-
etic male with internal  testes has the
external appearance of a female. The syn-
drome is a form of  intersex and is the
most common form of male pseudoher-
maphroditism. The cause is a defective
response of the body tissues to  testos-
terone. The causative genes are carried
on the X chromosome, and so females
can be carriers. Affected individuals ap-
pear to be girls throughout childhood,
and most develop female secondary
sexual characteristics at  puberty; but
amenorrhoea occurs, and a diagnosis is
usually made during investigations to
find its cause.  Chromosome analysis
shows the presence of male chromo-
somes and blood tests show male levels
of testosterone. Treatment of testicular
feminization syndrome involves surgi-
cal removal of the testes, to prevent
TENNIS ELBOW TESTICULAR FEMINIZATION
T
TENS
Impulse
generator
Electrodetestis, ectopic A  testis that is absent
from the scrotum because it has descen-
ded into an abnormal position, usually
in the groin or at the base of the penis.
The condition is most often discovered
soon after birth during a routine physical
examination. It is treated by orchidopexy.
(See also testis, undescended.)
testis, pain in the Pain in a  testis may
be caused by mild injury, a tear in the
wall of the testis due to a direct blow,
orchitis, epididymo-orchitis, and torsion
of the testis (see testis, torsion of). Some-
times, no cause is found and the pain
disappears without treatment. If the wall
of the testis is torn, an operation to
repair it may be needed.
testis, retractile A
testis that is drawn up
high into the groin by 
a pronounced muscle
reflex in response to
cold or touch. A retrac-
tile testis is normal in
young children, but it
usually disappears by
puberty.
testis, swollen Swel-
ling of the  testis or the
surrounding tissues in
the  scrotum. Harmless
and painless swellings
include epididymal cysts,
hydroceles,  varicoceles,
andspermatoceles. Can-
cer of the testis (see
testis, cancer of) is rare
but may be a cause of
painless swelling. Swel-
ling that is painful may be caused by a
direct blow, torsion of the testis (see
testis, torsion of),  orchitis,  epididymo-
orchitis, or, in very rare cases, cancer of
the testis. Any swelling of the testes
should be assessed promptly by a doctor.
testis, torsion of Twisting of the sper-
maticcord that causes severe pain and
swelling of the testis. The pain develops
rapidly and is sometimes accompanied
by abdominal pain and nausea. The tes-
tis becomes swollen and very tender,
and the skin of the  scrotum becomes
discoloured. Unless the torsion is treated
within a few hours, permanent damage
to the testis results. The condition is
cancerous change in later life, and ther-
apy with  oestrogendrugs. An affected
person is not fertile but can live a nor-
mal life as a woman.
testis One of 2 male sexual organs, also
called testicles, that produce sperm and
the hormone  testosterone. The testes
develop in the fetus within the abdomen
and usually descend into the  scrotum
by birth or within the next few months.
Each testis contains seminiferous tubu-
les that produce sperm. Cells between
the seminiferous tubules produce testos-
terone. Each testis is suspended by the
spermatic cord, composed of the vasdef-
erens, blood vessels, and nerves. (See
also testis, undescended.)
testis, cancer of A rare, cancerous
tumourof the testis. Testicular cancer is
most common in young to middle-aged
men, and the risk increases in indi-
viduals with a  history of undescended
testis (see  testis,  undescended). The
most common types of testicular cancer
are seminomas, which are made up of
only 1 type of cell, and  teratomas. The
cancer usually appears as a firm, pain-
less swelling of 1 testis. There may also
be pain and inflammation. Biopsy, fol-
lowed by  orchidectomy, is the usual
treatment, and may be combined with
chemotherapy. The tumours usually
respond well to treatment.
TESTIS
543
TESTIS, TORSION OF TESTIS
T
Urethra
Penis
Bladder Vas
deferens
Scrotum
Testis Epididymis
LOCATION
STRUCTURE OF A TESTIS
Seminiferous
tubule
Epididymis
Vas 
deferens
Spermatic
cord544
most common around puberty. It is
more likely to occur if the testis is
unusually mobile within the scrotum. 
Diagnosis is by physical examination.
Surgery is performed to untwist the testis
and anchor it in the scrotum with small
stitches to prevent recurrence. If irrever-
sible damage has occurred, orchidectomy
is performed. In either case, the other tes-
tis is anchored to the scrotum to prevent
torsion on that side. With prompt treat-
ment, recovery of the testis is complete.
testis, undescended A testis that has
failed to descend from the abdomen to
the scrotum. The condition usually affects
only 1 testis and occurs in about 1 per
cent of full-term and 10 per cent of pre-
mature male babies. An undescended
testis often descends within months of
birth but rarely descends after this time.
An undescended testis does not de-
velop normally, is incapable of normal
sperm production, and is at increased
risk of developing testicular cancer (see
testis, cancer of). If both testes are
undescended, infertility results.
A diagnosis is made during a physical
examination after birth or later in infancy.
Treatment is by orchidopexy, which usu-
ally reduces the risk of later infertility or
testicular cancer (see testis, cancer of). A
poorly developed undescended testis
may be removed if the other is normal.
test meal A procedure to measure the
output of acid by the  stomach. A naso-
gastrictube is passed into the stomach
after an overnight fast, and a sample of
gastric fluid is sucked up through the
tube. An injection of histamine or, more
usually, pentagastrin (a synthetic prepa-
ration of the hormone gastrin) is  given;
further samples of stomach fluid are
taken at intervals for up to 2 hours and
analysed for hydrochloric acid content.
The test is used for people thought to
be suffering from  Zollinger每Ellison syn-
drome, and to confirm the absence of
stomach acid in people with pernicious
anaemia (see anaemia, pernicious).
testosterone The main  androgenhor-
mone (male sex hormone). It stimulates
bone and muscle growth and sexual
development. It is produced by the testes
and, in very small amounts, the ovaries.
Synthetic or animal testosterone is
used to stimulate delayed  puberty or
treat some forms of male infertility.
tests, medical Tests may be performed
to investigate the cause of symptoms
and establish a diagnosis, to monitor
the course of a disease, or  to assess
response to treatment. A medical test-
ing programme carried out on apparently
healthy people to find disease at an early
stage is known as screening.
The accuracy of a test is based on its
sensitivity (ability to correctly identify
diseased subjects), specificity (ability to
correctly identify healthy subjects), and
predictive value. The predictive value is
determined by a mathematical formula
that involves the number of accurate
test results and the total number of tests
performed. The best tests have both
high specificity and high sensitivity, and
therefore high predictive value. 
tetanus A serious, sometimes fatal, dis-
ease of the central nervous system caused
by infection of a wound with spores of
the bacterium  CLOSTRIDIUM TETANI. The
spores live mainly in soil and manure
but are also found elsewhere, including
in the human intestine. When the spores
infect poorly oxygenated tissues they
multiply and produce a  toxin that acts
on the nerves controlling muscle acti-
vity. The most common symptom of this
is trismus (commonly known as lockjaw).
Other symptoms include stiffness of the
abdominal and back muscles, and con-
traction of facial muscles, producing a
fixed grimace. There may also be a fast
TESTIS, UNDESCENDED TETANUS
T
TESTIS, TORSION OF
Twisted
spermatic
cord
Vas
deferens
Blood
vessels
Scrotum
Testis
twisted
around
Penis545
pulse, slight fever, and profuse sweating.
Painful muscle spasms then develop, and
may result in asphyxia if they affect the
larynx or chest wall. The spasms usually
subside after 10 to 14 days.
About half a million cases of tetanus
occur worldwide each year, but fewer
than 20 occur in the UK. The diagnosis
is made from the symptoms and signs,
and a course of tetanus antitoxin injec-
tions is started. Most people recover
completely if treated promptly.
Prevention of tetanus in the UK relies
on the DPT vaccination being given rou-
tinely during childhood; booster shots
are given every 10 years.
tetany Spasms and twitching of the mus-
cles, most commonly in the hands and
feet, although the muscles of the face,
larynx, or spine may also be affected.
The spasmsare caused by a biochemical
disturbance and are painless at first; if
the condition persists, the spasms tend
to become increasingly painful. Muscle
damage may result if the underlying
cause is not treated. The most common
underlying cause is hypocalcaemia. Other
causes include hypokalaemia, hypervent-
ilation during a panic attack, or, more
rarely, hypoparathyroidism.
tetracosactide A drug used to test the
functioning of the  adrenal glands. Tetra-
cosactideis a chemical analogue of the
natural hormone corticotrophin (ACTH).
ACTH stimulates the cortices of the
adrenal glands to secrete hormones such
as cortisol. To diagnose a disorder of the
adrenal glands, a tetracosactide injection
is given and the blood cortisol level
measured. Failure of the level to rise
indicates an abnormality.
tetracycline drugs A group of antibiotic
drugs commonly used to treat bronchitis,
acne, syphilis, gonorrhoea, nongonococcal
urethritis, and certain types of pneumonia.
If taken with milk, tetracyclines are not
absorbed effectively into the intestines.
Possible side effects include nausea,
vomiting, diarrhoea, worsening of kidney
disorders, rash, and itching. Tetracyclines
may discolour developing teeth and are
therefore not usually prescribed for chil-
dren under age 12 or pregnant women.
tetralogy of Fallot A form of congenital
heart disease in which the heart has 4
coexisting anomalies: displacement of
the  aorta, narrowing of the pulmonary
valve,a hole in the ventricular septum,
and thickening of the right ventricle wall.
These cause poor oxygenation of the
blood pumped to the body, resulting in
cyanosis and breathlessness. Tetralogy of
Fallot occurs in about 1 in 1,000 infants. 
Affected infants appear normal at birth.
Severely affected infants may become
cyanosed and breathless early in life.
Other symptoms include failure to gain
weight and poor development.
An  ECG, echocardiogram (see  echo-
cardiography), and sometimes cardiac
catheterization are performed to confirm
the diagnosis and assess the severity of
the condition. The disorder is corrected
by open heart surgery.
tetraplegia An alternative term for the
condition quadriplegia.
thalamus One of 2 structures within the
brain consisting of a walnut-sized mass
of nerve tissue. The thalami sit at the
top of the brainstem and are connected
to all parts of the brain.
Each thalamus relays sensory infor-
mation flowing into the brain. Some
basic  sensations, such as pain, may
reach consciousness within the thala-
mus. Other types of sensory information
are processed and relayed to parts of
the cerebral cortex (outer layer of the
brain),where sensations are perceived. 
The thalamus seems to act as a filter
by selecting only information of particu-
lar importance. Certain centres in the
thalamus may also play a part in long-
term memory.
thalassaemia A group of inherited blood
disorders in which there is a faultin the
production of haemoglobin. Many of the
red  blood cells become fragile and
haemolyse (break up), leading to anaemia
(see  anaemia, haemolytic).Thalassaemia
is prevalent in the Mediterranean, the
Middle East, and Southeast Asia, and in
families originating from these areas.
Normal adult haemoglobin contains 2
pairs of globins (protein chains): alpha
and beta. In thalassaemia, a recessive de-
fective gene results in reduced synthesis
of 1 of the chains. Usually beta-chain pro-
ductionis disturbed (beta-thalassaemia).
Beta-thalassaemia minor (thalassaemia
THALASSAEMIA TETANY
Ttherapeutic A term meaning related to
treatment. The therapeutic dose of a
drug is the amount required to have the
greatest beneficial effect.
therapeutic community A method of
treating  drug dependence and  alcohol
dependence, and some  personality dis-
orders, that entails patients living
together as a group in a nonhospital
environment, usually under super-
vision. (See also social skills training.)
therapy The treatment of any disease or
abnormal physical or mental condition. 
thermography A technique by which
temperature patterns on the surface of
the skin are recorded in the form of an
image. Thermography provides clues to
the presence of diseases and abnormal-
ities that alter the temperature of the
skin, such as problems of the circulation,
inflammation, and tumours. There are 2
types of thermography. In one, a camera
or scanner picks up infrared radiation
naturally emitted from the skin. In the
other, sheets of temperature-sensitive
liquid crystals are applied to the skin;
they change colour in response to
changes in temperature. 
thermometer An instrument used to
measure temperature. A traditional clin-
ical thermometer consists of a glass
capillary tube (a tube with a very fine
bore) that is sealed at one end and has
a mercury-filled bulb at the other.
Modern versions of the clinical therm-
ometer include an electronic probe
connected to a digital display, and an
aural thermometer, which measures the
546
trait), which is never severe, is caused by
1 defective gene. The presence of 2 defec-
tive genes causes beta-thalassaemia
major  (Cooley＊s anaemia). The much
rarer disorder alpha-thalassaemia varies
in severity; alpha-thalassaemia major
usually results in fetal death.
Symptoms of beta-thalassaemia major
appear 3每6 months after birth. If un-
treated, bone marrow cavities expand,
leading to a characteristic enlargement
of the skull and facial bones.
Beta-thalassaemia major is diagnosed
from microscopic examination of the
blood, and from other blood tests. Treat-
ment is with  blood transfusions and,
sometimes, splenectomy. However, suc-
cessive  blood transfusions cause a
buildup of iron in the body (see haemo-
siderosis). Chelating agents are given by
continuous infusion to help the body
excrete the excess iron. A bone marrow
transplant offers a cure for the disease.
Genetic counselling is advised for par-
ents or other close relatives of a child
with thalassaemia, and also for any per-
son with thalassaemia trait. 
thalidomide A drug that was withdrawn
in the UK in 1961 after it was found to
cause limb deformities in many babies
born to women given the drug during
pregnancy. Thalidomide is still used to
treat certain forms of Hansen＊s disease
(leprosy) and Beh?et＊s syndrome.
thallium A rare metallic element that is
present as compounds in some zinc and
lead ores. Poisoning over a prolonged
period causes loss of hair, disorders of
the nerves in the limbs, and disturbance
of the stomach and intestines. Thallium-
201  (an artificial radioactive isotope) is
sometimes used in  radionuclide scan-
ning of the heart. 
THC The abbreviation for tetrahydro-
cannabinol, the active ingredient in
marijuana. 
theophylline A bronchodilator drug some-
times used to treat severe  asthma and
heart failure in cases that have failed to
respond to other treatments. Theophyl-
line is usually given orally but can be
given intravenously as emergency treat-
ment. Possible adverse effects include
dizziness, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea,
palpitations, and seizures. 
THALIDOMIDE THERMOMETER
T
THERMOMETER
Temperature
displayed
USING AN AURAL THERMOMETER547
temperature of the  eardrum. Both ver-
sions give an almost instant reading.
There are also disposable skin ther-
mometers that employ heat-sensitive
chemicals, which change colour at
specific temperatures. These are not as
reliable, however. Clinical thermom-
eters may be calibrated in degrees
Celsius (centigrade), degrees Fahren-
heit, or sometimes both.
thiabendazole See tiabendazole.
thiamine See vitamin B complex.
thiazides A type of diuretic drug.
thiopental A  barbiturate drug that is
widely used as a general anaesthetic
(see anaesthesia, general). Thiopental is
given by intravenous injection.
thioridazine An antipsychotic drug used
to treat schizophrenia. It is now used only
under specialist supervision because of
potentially serious side effects.
thirst The desire to drink. Thirst is one
means by which the amount of water in
the body is controlled (the other is the
volume of urine excreted).
Thirst is stimulated by an increased
concentration of salt, sugar, or certain
other substances in the blood. As the
blood passes through the hypothalamus
in the brain, special nerve receptors are
stimulated, inducing the sensation of
thirst. Thirst is also stimulated if blood
volume decreases as a result of sweating,
vomiting, diarrhoea, severe bleeding, or
extensive burns. Thirst may also be
caused by a dry mouth.
thirst, excessive A strong and persis-
tent need to drink, most commonly due
to  dehydration. Other causes include
untreated diabetes mellitus and diabetes
insipidus, kidney failure, treatment with
phenothiazine drugs, and severe blood
loss. Abnormal thirst may also be due
to a psychological condition known as
psychogenic polydipsia.
thoracic outlet syndrome A condition
in which pressure on the brachial plexus
causes pain in the arms and shoulders,
pins-and-needles sensation in the fin-
gers, and weakness of grip and other
hand movements. Severe symptoms are
usually caused by a cervical rib. Thoracic
outlet syndrome may also be caused by
drooping of the shoulders, an enlarged
scalenus muscle in the neck, or a tumour.
The condition is made worse by lifting
and carrying heavy loads or by increases
in body weight.
Treatment of thoracic outlet syndrome
usually consists of exercises to improve
posture, sometimes together with non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  and
muscle-relaxant drugs. Severe cases
may be treated by surgical removal of
the 1st rib.
thoracic surgery A surgical speciality
concerned with operations on organs
within the chest cavity. Sometimes, tho-
racic surgery is combined with heart
surgery, in which case it is known as
cardiothoracic surgery.
thoracotomy An operation in which
the chest is opened to provide access to
organs in the chest cavity. 
There are 2 types of thoracotomy:
lateral and anterior. In a lateral thora-
cotomy the chest is opened between 2
ribs to provide access to the  lungs,
major blood vessels, and the  oeso-
phagus. In an anterior thoracotomy, an
incision down the sternum (breast-
bone) provides access to the heart and
the coronary arteries.
thorax The medical name for the chest.
The thorax extends from the base of the
neck to the diaphragm muscle. 
thought The mental activity that enables
humans to reason, form judgments, and
solve problems. The essential features
of thought include the substitution of
symbols (in the form of words, numbers,
or images) for objects, the formation of
symbols into ideas, and the arrangement
of ideas into a certain order in the mind.
(See also thought disorders.)
thought disorders Abnormalities in
the structure or content of  thought, as
reflected in a person＊s speech, writing,
or behaviour. Schizophrenia causes sev-
eral thought disorders, including loss of
logical connections between associa-
tions, the invention of new words (see
neologisms), thought blocking (sudden
interruption in the train of thought), the
feeling that thoughts are being inserted
into or withdrawn from the mind, and
auditory hallucinations. 
Incoherent thoughts occur in all types
of  confusion, including  dementia and
delirium. Rapidly jumping from one idea
THOUGHT DISORDERS THIABENDAZOLE
T548
to another occurs in  hypomania and
mania. In depression, thinking becomes
slow, there is a lack of association, and
a tendency to dwell in great detail on
trivial subjects. In obsessive每compulsive
disorder, recurrent ideas seem to come
into a person＊s mind involuntarily. Delu-
sions, which occur in schizophrenia and
other psychotic illnesses, may be an
expression of distorted thinking.
threadworm infestation A common
infestation with a small worm,  ENTERO-
BIUS VERMICULARIS (pinworm), that lives
in the intestines. Threadworms primarily
affect children. The female adult thread-
worms are white and about 1 cm long
(large enough to see). They lay eggs in
the skin around the anus, and their
movements cause tickling or itching in
the anal region, often at night. Eggs are
transferred from the fingers to the mouth
to cause reinfestation or are carried on
toys or blankets to other children. Swal-
lowed eggs hatch in the intestine and
the worms reach maturity after a period
of 2每6 weeks. Diagnosis is made by see-
ing the worms or by applying a piece of
sticky tape to the anal area to collect
the worms or eggs. Treatment is with an
anthelmintic drug.
thrill A vibrating sensation felt when
the flat of the hand is held against an
area of the body. Thrill is caused by tur-
bulent blood flow in an  artery or the
heart. The term is also used to describe
the feeling produced by fluid within the
abdominal cavity in ascites.
throat A popular term for the pharynx.
The term is also sometimes used to
refer to the front of the neck.
throat cancer See  pharynx, cancer of;
larynx, cancer of.
thrombectomy The removal of a throm-
bus that is blocking a blood vessel. It is
performed as an emergency procedure
if a major artery is blocked, or as a pre-
cautionary measure if there is a risk of
an embolus breaking off. Before surgery,
the site of the thrombus is established
by angiography and the patient may be
given anticoagulant drugs.
thromboangiitis obliterans Another
name for Buerger＊s disease.
thrombocyte An alternative name for 
a platelet.
thrombocytopenia A reduction in the
number of platelets in the blood, result-
ing in a tendency to bleed. Sometimes
thrombocytopenic  purpura (abnormal
bleeding into the skin) develops. The
cause may be a reduced rate of platelet
production or fast rate of platelet des-
truction. Thrombocytopenia can be a
feature of leukaemia, lymphoma, systemic
lupus erythematosus, megaloblastic
anaemia, or hypersplenism. It can also be
caused by exposure to  radiation or,
more often, by an adverse reaction to a
prescribed drug such as a  thiazide
diuretic. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic pur-
pura  (ITP) is of unknown cause,  but it
may be an autoimmune disorder.
Thrombocytopenia is confirmed by a
blood count. Any underlying disease is
treated if possible. Children with ITP
may not need treatment, but adults are
usually given  corticosteroid drugs. If
thrombocytopenia persists, splenectomy
may be performed. When the cause is
known, treatment usually results in an
increase in platelet numbers.
thromboembolism The blockage of a
blood vessel by a piece of a blood clot
(embolus) that has broken off from a
thrombus elsewhere in the  circulation.
(See also thrombosis; embolism).
thrombolytic drugs Sometimes called
fibrinolytic drugs, this group of drugs is
used to treat thrombosis, embolism, and
myocardial infarction. Thrombolytic drugs
act within blood vessels to dissolve clots.
Possible adverse effects include abnor-
mal bleeding and an allergic reaction.
thrombophilia A tendency for blood to
clot too readily due to an inherited ab-
normality in proteins such as factor V. It
may not be recognized until specific cir-
cumstances such as injury or air travel
cause symptoms or signs. (See also
thrombosis,deep vein.)
thrombophlebitis Inflammation of a
section of vein, usually just under the
skin, with clot formation in the affected
part. This can occur after minor injury to
the vein or as a complication of varicose
veins or Buerger＊s disease. The affected
blood vessel is swollen, red, and tender,
and feels hard. Fever and malaise may
occur.A blood clot may develop. Treat-
ment includes support with a bandage,
THREADWORM INFESTATIONTHROMBOPHLEBITIS
T549
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and
sometimes  antibiotic drugs. The condi-
tion usually clears up in 10每14 days.
thrombosis The formation of a thrombus
(blood clot) in an undamaged blood
vessel.A thrombus that forms within an
artery supplying the heart muscle (coro-
nary thrombosis) is the usual cause of
myocardial infarction. A thrombus in an
artery of the brain (cerebral thrombosis)
is a common cause of  stroke. Thrombi
sometimes form in veins, either just
below the skin or in deeper veins (see
thrombosis, deep vein).
In arteries, thrombus formation may
be encouraged by atherosclerosis, smok-
ing, hypertension, and damage to blood
vessel walls from arteritis and phlebitis.
An increased clotting tendency may occur
in  pregnancy, when using  oral contra-
ceptives, or through prolonged immobility.
An arterial thrombosis may cause no
symptoms until blood flow is impaired.
Then, there is reduced tissue or organ
function and sometimes severe pain.
Venous thrombosis may also cause
pain and swelling. Diagnosis is made by
doppler ultrasound. In some cases, ang-
iography or  venography may also be
used. Treatment may include  anticoag-
ulant drugs  or  thrombolytic drugs,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and
antibiotic drugs. In life-threatening cases,
thrombectomy may be needed.
thrombosis, deep vein The formation
of a thrombus within deep-lying veins in
the leg. The cause is usually a combina-
tion of slow blood flow through 1 part
of the body (such as when sitting for
long periods or when the tissues are
compressed, as occurs in long-haul air-
craft flights) and an increase in the
clotting tendency of the blood, which
occurs with dehydration, after surgery
or injury, during pregnancy, and in
women taking oral contraceptives. Deep
vein thrombosis may also be caused by
polycythaemia. Deep vein thrombosis is
common in people with  heart failure
and those who have had a stroke or who
have been immobile for long periods.
Clots in the leg veins may cause pain,
tenderness, swelling, discoloration, and
ulceration of the skin, but they can be
symptomless. A deep vein thrombosis
is not necessarily serious in itself, but
part of the clot may break off and travel
in the bloodstream to the lungs. This is
known as a pulmonary embolism.
A diagnosis is made by doppler ultra-
sound scanning. Treatment depends on
the site and extent of the clots. Small
clots may not need treatment if they are
confined to the calf and the patient is
mobile. Otherwise,  anticoagulant drugs
or thrombolytic drugs are given. If there
is a high risk of a pulmonary embolism,
thrombectomy may be performed.
thrombus A blood clot that has formed
inside an intact blood vessel. A throm-
bus is life-threatening if it obstructs the
blood supply to an organ such as the
heart or brain. A thrombus may also
lead to gangrene in an organ or extrem-
ity, or to  embolism. (See also  blood
clotting; thrombosis.)
thrush A common name for the fungal
infection candidiasis.
thumb-sucking A common habit in
young children, which provides comfort,
oral gratification, amusement when
bored, and reassurance. Thumb-sucking
tends to decrease after age 3, and most
children grow out of it by age 7. In most
cases, it is not harmful. However, maloc-
clusion of the permanent teeth may
develop if the habit continues past age
7. This is usually temporary; if not, an
orthodontic appliance may be needed.
thymoma A rare  tumour of the  thymus
gland. The tumour can arise from any of
the cell types in the thymus gland and
can be cancerous or noncancerous. 
thymoxamine See moxisylyte.
thymus A gland that forms part of the
immune system. The thymus lies behind
the sternum and consists of 2 lobes that
join in front of the trachea. Each lobe is
made of lymphoid tissue consisting of
lymphocytes,  epithelium, and fat. The
thymus conditions lymphocytes to
become  T-cells. It plays a part in the
immune response until puberty, gradu-
ally enlarging during this time. After
puberty, it shrinks, but some glandular
tissue remains until middle-age. 
thyroglossal disorders A set of con-
genital defects caused by failure of the
thyroglossal duct to disappear during
embryonic development. In  embryos,
THYROGLOSSAL DISORDERS THROMBOSIS
T550
this duct runs from the base of the
tongue to the  thyroid gland. Abnormal
development may cause the duct to
persist in its entirety or partly as a cyst.
A cyst usually becomes infected and
swollen, which may lead to formation of
a  fistula. The cyst and any remaining
parts of the duct are removed.
thyroid cancer Rare  tumours of the
thyroid gland. In most cases the cause
is unknown, although exposure to radio-
active fallout increases the risk of
developing the condition. There are sev-
eral  types, depending on the type of
cells involved. In all of them, however,
the first sign is a firm nodule in the
neck, which may grow slowly or rapidly.
In many cases, the cancer is painless
and symptoms such as difficulty swal-
lowing, and hoarseness or loss of voice,
only develop when the tumour presses
on other structures. Adiagnosis is made
by thyroid scanning and needleaspiration
or a biopsy. A  thyroidectomy is usually
followed by treatment with radioactive
iodine to destroy any residual cancer.
Cure rates depend on the cell type and
on the size and spread of the tumour
when diagnosed. Patients need to take
thyroxine for the rest of their lives.
thyroidectomy Surgical removal of all
or part of the thyroid gland, performed
to treat  thyroid cancer, some cases of
hyperthyroidism, goitre, or a noncancer-
ous tumour of the thyroid gland.
thyroid-function tests  A group of
blood tests used to evaluate the func-
tion of the  thyroid gland and to detect
or confirm any thyroid disorder. The
thyroid hormones T3 and T4 are mea-
sured, as well as thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH), the pituitary gland hor-
mone that stimulates the thyroid gland.
thyroid gland One of the main  endo-
crine glands, which helps to regulate
the rate of all the body＊s internal pro-
cesses. The thyroid gland is situated in
the front of the neck, just below the lar-
ynx (voice box). It consists of 2 lobes,
one on each side of the  trachea (wind-
pipe), joined by a portion of tissue
called the isthmus. Thyroid tissue is
composed of follicular cells, which sec-
rete the iodine-containing hormones
thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3),
and parafollicular cells (or C cells),
which secrete the hormone  calcitonin.
T4 and T3 are important in controlling
the body＊s metabolism. Calcitonin
helps to regulate calcium balance in 
the body. (See also  thyroid gland, dis-
orders of; thyroid hormones.) 
thyroid gland, disorders of Disorders
of the thyroid gland may cause hyperthy-
roidism, hypothyroidism, or enlargement
or distortion of the gland. Myxoedema,
Graves＊ disease, and  Hashimoto＊s thy-
roiditis are common disorders. Goitre may
sometimes occur with no accompanying
abnormality of thyroid function.In rare
cases, the gland is absent at birth, pro-
ducing severe  cretinism. Sometimes it
develops in an abnormal position in the
neck, causing, in rare cases, difficulty in
swallowing or breathing.
A genetic disorder may impair the thy-
roid＊s ability to secrete hormones and
goitre may result. Thyroid infection is
uncommon and leads to thyroiditis. Viral
infection can cause extreme pain and
temporary hyperthyroidism. Hormonal
changes during puberty or pregnancy
may cause a degree of goitre temporar-
ily. Hyperthyroidism due to excessive
production of TSH by the pituitary
gland is rare but can occur as a result of
a pituitary tumour.
Because iodine is necessary for the
production of thyroid hormone, its defi-
ciency may lead to goitre. Severe iodine
deficiency in children may cause myx-
oedema. (See also thyroid cancer.)
THYROID CANCERTHYROID GLAND, DISORDERS OF
T
THYROID GLAND
Thyroid cartilage
LOCATION
Thyroid gland
Tracheathyroid hormones The 3 hormones
produced by the  thyroid gland are thy-
roxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3),
which regulate metabolism, and  calci-
tonin, which helps to regulate calcium
levels in the body. 
thyroiditis Inflammation of the thyroid
gland. Thyroiditis occurs in several dif-
ferent forms. The most common is
Hashimoto＊s thyroiditis, an  autoimmune
disorder that results in hypothyroidism.
Less commonly, the inflammation is
associated with a viral infection, or it
may occur temporarily soon after child-
birth; in both these cases, long-term
damage to the gland is uncommon.
thyroid scanning Techniques, such as
radionuclide scanning and  ultrasound
scanning, that are used to provide infor-
mation about the location, anatomy,
and function of the thyroid gland. 
thyrotoxicosis Overactivity of the thy-
roid gland, also called hyperthyroidism. 
thyroxine The most important  thyroid
hormone. Thyroxine is represented by
the symbol T4.
TIA The abbreviation for  transient isch-
aemic attack.
tiabendazole A rarely used anthelmintic
drug  used to treat  worm infestations,
including  strongy-
loidiasis. It has
been replaced by
newer anthelmin-
tics that have few
side effects.
tibia Also called
the shin, the inner
and thicker of the 
2 long bones in 
the lower leg. The
tibia runs parallel
to the  fibula, the
narrower bone to
which it is attached
by  ligaments. The
upper end articu-
lates with the femur
to form the  knee
joint; the lower end
articulates with the
talus to form part
of the  ankle joint.
On the inside of
the ankle, the tibia
551
is widened and protrudes to form a
bony prominence that is known as 
the medial malleolus.
tibolone A drug used in the treatment
of menopausal symptoms and to protect
against  osteoporosis. The drug is given
continuously and combines the effects
of  oestrogens  and  progestogens. Possi-
ble adverse effects include irregular
vaginal bleeding, changes in body
weight, ankle  oedema, dizziness, skin
reactions, headache,  migraine, growth
of facial hair, depression, and myalgia.
tic A repeated, uncontrolled, purpose-
less contraction of a muscle or group of
muscles, most commonly in the face,
shoulders, or arms. Typical tics include
blinking, mouth twitching, and shrug-
ging. Tics usually develop in childhood
and are often a sign of a minor psycho-
logical disturbance. They usually stop
within a year of onset but in some cases
persist into adult life. (See also Gilles de
la Tourette＊s syndrome.)
tic douloureux An alternative name for
trigeminal neuralgia.
ticks and disease Small, 8-legged anim-
als that feed on blood and sometimes
transmit diseases to humans via their
bites. Ticks are about 3 mm long before
feeding and become larger when bloated
with blood. Ticks may be picked up in
long grass, scrub, woodland, or caves.
In the UK, the only disease known to be
transmitted to humans by ticks is Lyme
disease. Others transmitted in various
parts of the world include relapsing fever,
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Q fever,
tularaemia, and certain types of viral en-
cephalitis. The prolonged bite of certain
female ticks can cause tick paralysis, in
which a toxin in the tick saliva affects
the nerves that control movement. In
extreme cases, this can be fatal.
Tietze＊s syndrome Chest pain local-
ized to an area on the front of the chest
wall, usually made worse by movement
of the arms or trunk or by pressure on
the chest wall. The syndrome is caused
by inflammation of 1 or several rib carti-
lages and symptoms may persist for
months. Treatment is with  analgesics,
nonsteroidalanti-inflammatorydrugs, or
local injections of  corticosteroiddrugs
into the cartilage.
TIETZE＊S SYNDROME THYROID HORMONES
T
TIBIA
Patella
Tibia
Fibula
Femur
Medial
malleolus
Talus552
timolol A beta-blocker drug used to treat
hypertension and angina pectoris. Timolol
may also be given after a myocardial in-
farction. It is used as eye-drops to treat
glaucoma. Possible side effects, such as
cold hands and feet, are typical of other
beta-blockers. Eye-drops may cause irri-
tation, blurred vision, and headache.
tinea Any of a group of common  fungal
infections of the skin, hair, or nails. Most
are caused by fungi called dermato-
phytes. The infections may be acquired
from another person, an animal, soil,
the floors of showers, or from house-
hold objects, such as chairs or carpets. 
The most common type of tinea infec-
tion is tinea pedis (athlete＊s foot). Tinea
corporis causes itchy, usually circular,
patches on the body. Tinea cruris (jock
itch) produces a reddened, itchy area
spreading from the genitals over the
inside of the thighs. Tinea capitis caus-
es round, itchy, patches of hair loss on
the scalp; it occurs mainly in children.
Ringworm of the nails (tinea unguium)
is often accompanied by scaling of the
soles or palms. The nails become thick
and turn white or yellow. 
Most types are diagnosed by appear-
ance and by culturing the organisms in
a laboratory. Treatment is usually with
either topical or oral antifungal drugs. 
tingling See pins-and-needles.
tinidazole An  antibacterial drug that is
particularly useful in treating anaerobic
infections. It is also used, together with
other drugs, to eradicate  HELICOBACTER
PYLORI infection. Side effects may include
nausea, vomiting, gastrointestinal dis-
turbances, headache, and dizziness.
tinnitus A ringing, buzzing, whistling,
hissing, or other noise heard in the ear
or ears in the absence of a noise in the
environment. Tinnitus is almost always
associated with hearing loss, particularly
that due to  presbyacusis and  exposure
to loud noise. It can also occuras a
symptom of ear disorders such as  laby-
rinthitis,  M谷ni豕re＊s disease,  otitis media,
otosclerosis,  ototoxicity, and blockage of
the ear canal with earwax. It may also be
caused by certain drugs, such as aspirin
or quinine, or may follow a head injury. 
Any underlying disorder is treated if
possible. Many sufferers make use of 
a radio, television, cassette player, or
headphones to block out the noise in
their ears. A tinnitus masker, a hearing-
aid type device that plays white noise (a
random mixture of sounds at a wide
range of frequencies), may be effective.
tinzaparin A type of low molecular weight
heparin that may be injected once daily
in the treatment of deep vein thrombo-
sis (see thrombosis, deep vein).
tiredness A common complaint that is
usually the result of overwork or poor
quality, or insufficient sleep. Persistent
tiredness may be caused by a number of
conditions, including  depression,  anxi-
ety, anaemia, and diabetes.
tissue A collection of cells specialized to
perform a particular function. 
tissue fluid The watery liquid present
in the tiny gaps between body cells,
also known as interstitial fluid.
tissue-plasminogen activator A sub-
stance produced by body tissues that
prevents abnormal  blood clotting. Also
called TPA, it is produced by the inner
lining of blood vessels. TPA can be pre-
pared artificially for use as a thrombolytic
drug, which is called alteplase. This is
used in the treatment of  myocardial
infarction, severe  angina pectoris, and
arterial  embolism, including  pulmonary
embolism. Possible side effects include
bleeding or the formation of a  haema-
toma at the injection site and an allergic
reaction. (See also fibrinolysis.)
tissue-typing The classification of cer-
tain characteristics of the  tissues of
prospective organ donors and recipients
(see  transplant surgery). This minimizes
the risk of rejection of a donor organ by
the recipient＊s immune system.
Aperson＊s tissue type is classified in
terms of their  histocompatibility anti-
gens, the most important of which are
the human leukocyte antigens (HLAs),
on the surface of cells. A person＊s set of
HLAs is inherited and unique (except
for identical twins, who have the same
set). Nevertheless, close relatives often
have closely matching HLA types. A
person＊s tissue-type is established by
laboratory tests on cells from a blood
sample. In one method, an antiserum
containing  antibodies to a particular
HLA is added to the test specimen. If
TIMOLOL TISSUE-TYPING
T553
the HLA is present, it is detected by an
observable colour or other change.
titanium dental implants  See  im-
plants, dental.
TMJ syndrome See  temporomandibu-
lar joint syndrome.
toadstool poisoning See  mushroom
poisoning.
tobacco The dried leaf of the plant NICO-
TIANA TABACUM. Tobacco is used for
smoking, chewing, or as snuff by bil-
lions of people. It contains a variable
percentage of nicotine, and several car-
cinogenic substances. There is a direct
proportion between the amount of to-
bacco used, the period over which it is
used, and the likelihood of  cancer.
Smokers are at increased risk of several
types of cancer, including  lung cancer,
bladder cancer, kidney cancer, and pan-
creatic cancer (see pancreas, cancer of).
All tobacco users have an increased risk
of cancers of the oral cavity (see mouth
cancer), pharynx (see  pharynx, cancer
of), larynx (see  larynx, cancer of) and
oesophagus (see oesophagus, cancer of).
tobacco-smoking See smoking.
tobramycin An  antibiotic drug used to
treat serious infections such as periton-
itis, meningitis, and severe infections of
the lungs, skin, bones, and joints. In
eye-drop form, it is sometimes used to
treat  conjunctivitis and blepharitis. High
dosesof injected tobramycin may cause
kidney damage, deafness, nausea, vom-
iting, and headache. Any preparation of
tobramycin may cause rash and itching.
tocography An obstetric procedure for
recording muscular contractions of the
uterus during  childbirth. It is usually
combined with  fetal heart monitoring
(see cardiotocography).
tocopherol A constituent of  vitamin E.
Four tocopherols (alpha, beta, gamma,
and delta) and several tocopherol deriv-
atives together make up the vitamin.
toddler＊s diarrhoea A common condi-
tion affecting some children for a period
after the introduction of an adult diet. It
occurs because the child is unable to
digest food properly, perhaps because
of inadequate chewing; the diarrhoea
contains recognizable pieces of food.
This diarrhoea is no cause for concern,
and no treatment is needed.
Todd＊s paralysis Weakness in part of
the body following some types of epil-
eptic seizure (see epilepsy). The weakness
may last for minutes, hours, or even
days, but there is no lasting effect. The
cause is thought to be temporary dam-
age to the motor cortex (the area of the
brain that controls movement).
toe One of the digits of the foot. Each
toe has 3 phalanges (bones), except for
the hallux (big toe), which has 2. The pha-
langes join at hinge joints. An artery,
vein, and nerve run down each side of the
toe, and the whole structure is enclosed
in skin with a nail at the top. The main
function of the toes is to maintain bal-
ance during walking. Congenital disorders
include toes missing at birth. (See also
polydactyly; syndactyly; and webbing.)
toenail, ingrowing A painful condi-
tion of a toe (usually the big toe) in
which 1 or both edges of the nail press
into the adjacent skin, leading to infec-
tion and inflammation. The cause is
usually incorrect cutting of the nail or
wearing tight-fitting shoes. Temporary
pain relief can be obtained by bathing
the foot once or twice daily in a strong,
warm, salt solution, then covering the
nail with a dry gauze dressing. Antibiotics
may be prescribed. In some cases, the
edge of the nail is removed and the nail
bed obliterated to prevent recurrence. 
toilet-training The process of teaching
a young child to acquire complete bowel
and bladder control. A child is unlikely to
be completely toilet-trained before age
3 and may normally take much longer
to remain dry at night (see enuresis).
tolbutamide An oral hypoglycaemic drug
(see  hypoglycaemics, oral) used in the
treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
tolerance The need to take increasingly
higher doses of a  drug to obtain the
same physical or mental effect. Toler-
ance develops after taking a drug over a
period of time and usually results either
from the liver becoming more efficient
at breaking the drug down or from body
tissues becoming less sensitive to it.
tolnaftate An  antifungal drug applied 
to the skin to treat, and sometimes pre-
vent, recurrent tinea infections, including
athlete＊s foot. In rare cases, tolnaftate
may cause skin irritation or a rash.
TOLNAFTATE TITANIUM DENTAL IMPLANTS
T554
tomography An imaging technique that
produces a cross-sectional image (※slice§)
of an organ or part of the body. Most
tomography today is performed using
CT scanning and  MRI, which produce
accurate and detailed images.
-tomy A suffix denoting the operation
of cutting or making an incision.
tone, muscle The natural tension in the
muscle fibres. At rest, all muscle fibres
are kept in a state of partial contraction
by nerve impulses from the spinal cord.
Abnormally high muscle tone causes an
increased resistance to movement, spas-
ticity, and rigidity.  Abnormally low
muscle tone causes floppiness (see
hypotonia; hypotoniain infants).
tongue A muscular, flexible organ in the
floor of the mouth that is composed of a
mass of muscles covered by a  mucous
membrane. Themuscles are attached to
the mandible (lower jaw) and hyoid bone
above  the  larynx. Tiny nodules called
papillae stick out from the tongue＊s
upper surface, giving it a rough texture.
Between the papillae at the sides and
base of the tongue are the  taste buds.
Taste signals are picked up by nerve
fibres from 1 of 4  cranial nerves, and
impulses then travel to the brain. The
tongue plays an essential part in masti-
cation, swallowing, and speech.
tongue cancer The most serious type of
mouth cancer due to its rapid spread. It
mainly affects people over 40 and is as-
sociated with  smoking,heavy alcohol
consumption, and poor oral hygiene. The
edge of the tongue is most commonly
affected. The first sign may be a small
ulcer with a raised margin, a  leukoplakia,
a fissure, or a raised, hard mass.
Diagnosis of tongue cancer is made by
a  biopsy. Small tumours, especially
those occurring at the tip of the tongue,
are usually removed surgically. Larger
tumours or those that have spread
often require radiotherapy.
tongue depressor A flat wooden or
metal instrument used to hold the
tongue on the floor of the mouth to
allow examination of the throat.
tongue-tie A minor mouth defect, also
known as ankyloglossia, in which the
frenulum (the band of tissue attaching
the underside of the tongue to the floor
of the mouth) is too short and extends
forwards to the tip of the tongue. There
are usually no symptoms apart from lim-
ited movement of the tongue. Rarely,
the condition causes a speech defect,
and a minor operation is required to
divide the frenulum. 
tonic One of a diverse group of reme-
dies intended to relieve symptoms such 
as malaise, lethargy, and loss of ap-
petite. Evidence suggests that tonics
mainly have a  placebo effect. The term
tonic is also used adjectivally to relate
to muscle tone (see tone, muscle), as in
the tonic neck reflex, one of the primi-
tive reflexes found in newborn infants.
tonometry The procedure for measur-
ing the pressure of the fluid within the
eye, usually performed by an ophthal-
mologist during an eye examination (see
eye, examination of). Tonometry is use-
ful in diagnosing glaucoma.
tonsil One of a pair of oval tissue masses
at the back of the throat on either side.
The tonsils are made up of lymphoid
tissue and form part of the  lymphatic
system. Along with the adenoids, at the
base of the tongue, the tonsils protect
against upper respiratory tract infec-
tions. The tonsils gradually enlarge
TOMOGRAPHY TONSIL
T
10th and
9th cranial
nerves
Epiglottis
Sweet
Tonsil
TONGUE
5th and 
7th cranial
nerves
Sectioned
tongue
Bitter
taste
receptor
Sour
Salty555
from birth until the age of 7, after which
time they shrink substantially. Tonsillitis
is a common childhood infection.
tonsillectomy Surgical removal of the
tonsils, which is now performed only if a
child suffers frequent, recurrent attacks
of severe tonsillitis. The operation is also
carried out to treat  quinsy (an abscess
around the tonsil).
tonsillitis Inflammation of the tonsils as
a result of infection. Tonsillitis mainly
occurs in children under age 9. Some-
times the tonsils become repeatedly
infected by the microorganisms they are
supposed to protect against. The main
symptoms are a sore throat and diffi-
culty in swallowing. The throat is visibly
inflamed. Other common symptoms are
fever, headache, earache, enlarged and
tender  lymph nodes in the neck, and
bad breath. Occasionally, there may be
temporary deafness or  quinsy (an abs-
cess around the tonsil). 
Tonsillitis is treated with plenty of flu-
ids and an  analgesic drug such as
paracetamol; in some cases  antibiotic
drugs may also be prescribed.
tooth See teeth.
tooth abscess See abscess, dental.
toothache Pain in 1 or more  teeth and
sometimes the  gums. Causes include
dental caries, a tooth fracture (see frac-
ture, dental), a deep, unlined filling (see
filling, dental),  periodontitis, a dental
abscess (see abscess, dental), a blow to
a tooth, or referred pain from  sinusitis.
Analgesic drugs may provide temporary
relief. Treatment depends on the cause.
toothbrushing Cleaning of the  teeth
with a brush to remove plaque and food
particles from tooth surfaces and to stim-
ulate the gums. Toothbrushing should
be carried out twice a day using a fluo-
ride dentifrice (usually toothpaste).
tooth decay See caries, dental. 
tooth extraction See extraction, dental.
toothpaste See dentifrice.
tophus A collection of uric acid crystals
deposited in tissues, especially around
joints, but occasionally in other places
such as the ear. It is a sign of  hyper-
uricaemia, which accompanies gout.
topical A term describing a drug that is
applied to the surface of the body, not
swallowed or injected. 
torsion A term that means twisting, often
applied to the intestine or testis.
torticollis Twisting of the neck, causing
the head to be tilted and fixed in an ab-
normal position (wry neck). There is
often neck pain and stiffness. The cause
is usually a minor neck injury that irri-
tates cervical nerves, leading to muscle
spasm. Other causes are sleeping in an
awkward position, a neck-muscle injury
at birth, and a burn or injury that has
caused heavy scarring.
Torticollis due to muscle spasm may be
treated by use of an orthopaedic collar
(see collar, orthopaedic), heat treatment,
ultrasound treatment,  physiotherapy, or
injections of the toxin that causes botu-
lism. When the cause is an injury arising
from birth, the muscle is gently stretched
several times each day; occasionally, an
operation is required.
touch The sense by which certain cha-
racteristicsof objects, such as their size,
shape, temperature, and surface texture,
can be ascertained by physical contact.
The skin has many types of touch
receptors, including Merkel＊s discs and
Meissner＊s corpuscles to detect light
touch, and Pacinian corpuscles to sense
deep pressure and vibration. Signals
from these receptors pass, via sensory
nerves, to the spinal cord, from there to
the  thalamus in the brain, and on to the
sensory cortex, where touch sensations
are perceived and interpreted.
The various parts of the body differ in
their sensitivity to painful stimuli and 
in touch discrimination. For example, the
TOUCH TONSILLECTOMY
T
TONSIL
Nasal
cavity
Adenoid
Tongue
Pharynx
Opening of
eustachian
tube
Tonsil
Epiglottis
Palate556
cornea is several hundred times more
sensitive to painful stimuli than the
soles of the feet. (See also sensation.)
Tourette＊s syndrome See Gilles de la
Tourette＊s syndrome.
tourniquet A device placed around a
limb to compress blood vessels. A tour-
niquet may be used to help locate a
vein for an intravenous injection or for
the withdrawal of blood. An inflatable
tourniquet, called an Esmarch＊s bandage,
is used to control blood flow in some
limb operations. The use of a tourniquet
as a first-aid measure to stop severe
bleeding can cause gangrene.
toxaemia Presence in the bloodstream
of toxins produced by bacteria. (See also
preeclampsia; toxic shock syndrome.)
toxaemia of pregnancy See  pre-
eclampsia.
toxicity The property of being toxic (pois-
onous). Toxicity also refers to the severity
of adverse effects or illness produced by
a toxin, a poison, or a drug overdose.
toxicology The study of  poisons. (See
also poisoning.)
toxic shock syndrome An uncommon,
severe illness caused by a  toxin pro-
duced by the bacterium STAPHYLOCOCCUS
AUREUS. Many cases occur in women
using vaginal tampons. Other cases have
been linked to use of a contraceptive
cap,  diaphragm, or sponge (see  contra-
ception), or to skin wounds or infections
by the bacterium elsewhere in the body.
A high fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, head-
ache, muscle aches and pains, dizziness,
and disorientation develop  suddenly. A
widespread skin rash that resembles sun-
burn and also affects the palmsand
soles, develops. Blood pressure may fall
dangerously low, and shock may develop.
Other complications include kidney fail-
ure and  liver failure. Treatment in an
intensive care unit may be needed.
toxin A poisonous protein produced by
pathogenic (disease-causing) bacteria,
various animals, or some plants. Bacte-
rial toxins are sometimes subdivided into
3 categories:  endotoxins, which are
released from dead bacteria;  exotoxins,
which are released from live bacteria; and
enterotoxins, which inflame the intestine.
(See also poison; poisoning; toxaemia.)
toxocariasis An infestation of humans,
usually children, with the larvae of TOXO-
CARA CANIS: a small, threadlike worm
thatlives in the intestines of dogs.
Children who play with an infested dog
or soil contaminated with dog faeces,
and who then put their fingers in their
mouths, may swallow some of the worm
eggs.  The eggs hatch in the intestines,
and the released larvae migrate to organs
such as the liver, lungs, brain, and eyes.
Usually, infestation causes mild fever
and malaise, which soon clears up; but
heavy infestation may lead to pneumonia
and seizures. Loss of vision may occur if
larvae enter the eye and die there.
A diagnosis is made from sputum
analysis, and by a  liver biopsy. Severe
cases require treatment in hospital with
tiabendazole and an anticonvulsantdrug.
toxoid An inactivated bacterial toxin. Cer-
tain toxoids are used to immunize against
specific diseases, such as tetanus.
toxoplasmosis An infection caused by
the protozoan TOXOPLASMA GONDII that is
often caused by eating undercooked
meat from infected animals, or by hand-
ling faeces from infected cats. In most
cases there are no symptoms, but some-
times there may be a feverish illness
that resembles infectious mononucleosis.
Retinitis (inflammation of the retina)
and choroiditis may also develop. In peo-
ple  with an  immunodeficiency disorder
toxoplasmosis may cause lung and heart
damage and severe encephalitis.
TOURETTE＊S SYNDROME TOXOPLASMOSIS
T
TOUCH
Meissner＊s
corpuscle
TOUCH RECEPTORS IN SKIN
Pacinian
corpuscle
Merkel＊s
disc
Free nerve
endingToxoplasmosis contracted by a pregnant
woman is transmitted to the fetus in
about a third of cases. It may result in
miscarriage or stillbirth, or the infant may
have an enlarged liver and spleen, blind-
ness, hydrocephalus, learning difficulties,
or may die during infancy. Infection in
late pregnancy usually has no ill effects.
The diagnosis is made from  blood
tests. Treatment (with  pyrimethamine
and a  sulphonamide drug) is necessary
only in pregnant women, in children
with severe symptoms, in people with
an immune system deficiency, and in
cases of retinitis or choroiditis. 
TPA The abbreviation used for  tissue-
plasminogen activator. 
trabeculectomy A surgical procedure
to control  glaucoma by allowing the
fluid from the front chamber of the eye
to drain out under the conjunctiva.
trace elements  Minerals  necessary in
minute amounts in the diet to maintain
health. Examples are chromium, copper,
zinc, and selenium. (See also nutrition.)
tracer A radioactive substance that is
introduced into the body so that its dis-
tribution, processing, and elimination
from the body can be monitored. 
trachea The air passage, also called the
windpipe, that runs from immediately
below the  larynx to behind the upper
part of the sternum, where it divides to
form the  bronchi. The trachea is made
of fibrous and elastic tissue and smooth
muscle. It also contains about 20 rings of
cartilage, which keep it open. The lining
of the trachea has cells (goblet cells)
that secrete mucus and cells with  cilia,
LOCATION
which beat the mucus upwards to help
keep the lungs and airways clear. 
tracheitis Inflammation of the  trachea.
Tracheitis is usually caused by a viral
infection and is aggravated by inhaled
fumes, especially tobacco smoke. It often
occurs with  laryngitis and bronchitis in a
condition known as laryngotracheobron-
chitis.  Symptoms include a painful dry
cough and hoarseness. In most cases,
no treatment is needed.
tracheoesophageal fistula A rare birth
defect in which an abnormal passage
connects the  trachea with the oesopha-
gus. About 3 babies per 10,000 are born
with this fistula.
The condition is often discovered soon
after birth; diagnosis may be confirmed
by X-rays. Treatment consists of an oper-
ationto  close the fistula and connect
the trachea and oesophagus correctly. 
tracheostomy An operation in which
an opening is made in the trachea and a
tube is inserted to maintain an effective
airway. A tracheostomy is used for the
emergency treatment of airway prob-
lems involving the  larynx. A planned
tracheostomy is most commonly perfor-
med on a person who has lost the
ability to breathe naturally and is under-
going long-term ventilation or is unable
to keep saliva and other secretions out
of the trachea. Permanent tracheostomy
is needed after laryngectomy.
tracheotomy Cutting of the trachea. (See
also tracheostomy.)
trachoma A persistent infectious disease
of the cornea and conjunctiva. Trachoma
is caused by  CHLAMYDIATRACHOMATIS
and is spread by
direct contact and
possibly by flies
(see  chlamydial
infections). It is
uncommon in the
UK, but, world-
wide, is the most
common causeof
blindness .
tract Any one of 
a group of organs
that form a com-
mon pathway to
perform a partic-
ular function. The
557
TRACT TPA
T
TRACHEA
Cartilage ring
Mucous
membrane
STRUCTURE OF TRACHEA
Air
passage
Layer of
mucus
Trachea
Bronchus
Muscle558
term also refers to a bundle of nerve
fibres that have a common function.
traction A procedure in which part of
the body is placed under tension to cor-
rect the alignment of 2 adjoining
structures or to hold them in position.
Traction is most commonly used to
treat a fracture in which muscles around
the bone ends are pulling the bones 
out of alignment.
training A programme of exercises that
is undertaken to prepare for a particular
sport. Training may be concentrated on
improving skills or on improving physical
fitness. Fitness training should include
both  aerobic and anaerobic exercises,
which together build up strength, flexi-
bility, and endurance. Interval training
is a type of fitness programme in which
a particular exercise is repeated several
times with a rest period between. Cir-
cuit training consists of performing a
set number of different exercises.
trait Any characteristic or condition that
is inherited (determined by 1 or more
genes). Blue or brown eye colour, dark
or light skin, body proportions, and nose
shape are examples of genetic traits.
The term trait is also sometimes used
to describe a mild form of a recessive
genetic disorder. 
tramadol An opioid drug used to relieve
severe pain following a heart attack, sur-
gery, or serious illness. It is less likely to
cause dependence with long-term use
than most opioids. Possible side effects
include nausea, vomiting, drowsiness,
confusion, and impaired consciousness.
trance A sleeplike state in which con-
sciousness is reduced, voluntary actions
lessened or absent, and body functions
diminished. Trances are claimed to be
induced by  hypnosis and have been
reported as part of a group experience.
Trances may be a feature of  catalepsy,
automatism, and petit mal epilepsy. 
tranexamic acid An antifibrinolytic drug
that promotes blood clotting. It is used
to treat menorrhagia. Possible side effects
include diarrhoea, nausea, and vomiting.
tranquillizer drugs Drugs that have a
sedative effect. Tranquillizers are div-
ided into 2 types: major tranquillizers
(see  antipsychotic drugs) and minor
tranquillizers (see antianxiety drugs).
transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation See TENS.
transdermal patch A method of admin-
istering a drug through the skin. The drug
is released from the patch over a period
of time and is absorbed by the skin.
transference The unconscious displace-
ment of emotions from people who
were important during one＊s childhood,
such as parents, to other people during
adulthood. (See also psychoanalysis.)
transfusion See blood transfusion.
transfusion, autologous  See  blood
transfusion, autologous.
transient ischaemic attack (TIA) A
brief interruption of the blood supply to
part of the brain, which causes tem-
porary impairment of vision, speech,
sensation, or movement. The episode
typically  lasts for several minutes or, at
the most, for a few hours. TIAs are some-
times describedas  mini strokes, and
they can be the prelude to a stroke.
TIAs may be caused by a blood clot
(see embolism) temporarily blocking an
artery that supplies the brain, or by
narrowing of an artery as a result 
of atherosclerosis.
After a TIA, tests such as CT scanning,
blood tests,  ultrasound scanning, or
angiography may be needed to deter-
mine a cause. In some cases, the heart
is studied as a possible source of blood
clots. Treatment is aimed at preventing
stroke, which occurs within 5 years in
up to one third of patients with TIA.
Treatments include endarterectomy, anti-
coagulantdrugs, or aspirin. 
TRACTION TRANSIENT ISCHAEMIC ATTACK
T
TRANSDERMAL PATCH
Patch
applied
to skin559
transillumination A procedure that is
sometimes carried out during physical
examination of a lump or swelling. Light
from a small torch is shone on 1 side of
the lump; if it can be seen on the other
side, the lump contains clear fluid. 
translocation A rearrangement of the
chromosomes inside a person＊s cells; it
is a type of mutation. Sections of chro-
mosomes may be exchanged or the main
parts of 2 chromosomes may be joined.
A translocation may be inherited or ac-
quired as the result of a new mutation.
A translocation often has no obvious
effect, and causes no abnormality. How-
ever, in some cases, it can mean that
some of the affected person＊s egg or
sperm cells carry too much or too little
chromosomal material, which may cause
a  chromosomal abnormality, such as
Down＊s syndrome, in his or her children.
transmissible A term meaning capable
of being passed from one person, or
one organism, to another.
transplant surgery Replacement of a
diseased organ or tissue with a healthy,
living substitute. The organ is usually
taken from a person who has just died.
Some kidneys are transplanted from a
patient＊s living relatives (see organ dona-
tion). The results of surgery have also
been improved by testing for  histo-
compatibilityantigens and tissue-typing.
Rejection is a major problem. However,
a combination of a  corticosteroid drug
and  ciclosporin are given in order to
suppress this response.
Every patient who undergoes an organ
transplant operation must take immuno-
suppressant drugs indefinitely. (See also
heart transplant;  heart每lung transplant;
liver transplant; kidney transplant.) 
transposition of the great vessels A
serious form of congenital heart disease
in which the aorta and pulmonary artery
are transposed.  Open heart surgery is
needed to correct the defect. 
transsexualism A rare disorder in which
a person wishes to live as a member of
the opposite sex. Transsexuals commonly
seek hormonal or surgical treatment to
bring about a physical sex change. A
psychiatric evaluation and a physical
examination are necessary before such
treatment is undertaken.
transvestism Also called cross-dressing,
a persistent desire by a man to dress in
women＊s clothing.
tranylcypromine An antidepressant drug
that belongs to the monoamine-oxidase
inhibitor (MAOI) group and is used main-
lyin patients with severe depression.
trapezius muscle A large, diamond-
shaped muscle extending from the back
of the skull to the lower part of the
spine in the chest and across the width
of the shoulders. It is attached to the
top and back of the shoulderblade and
to the outermost part of the collarbone.
The trapezius helps support the neck and
spine and is involved in moving the arm.
trapped nerve See nerve, trapped.
trauma A physical injury or severe emo-
tional shock. (See also  post-traumatic
stress disorder.)
trauma surgery See traumatology.
traumatology Emergency treatment of
patients suffering from acute trauma
(such as severe and/or multiple injuries).
travel immunization Anyone planning
to travel abroad may need  immuniza-
tions before departure. Although few
immunizations are compulsory for inter-
national travel, some are recommended
for the traveller＊s protection.
Travel agents and tour operators often
include information about which immu-
nizations may be needed, but travellers
should consult a doctor about individ-
ual requirements. Some vaccines must
be given in 2每3 doses several weeks
apart. Therefore, a doctor should be
consulted at least 2每3 months before
departure. Children under 1 year, and
people with a compromised immune
system or serious underlying disorder
may not be able to have some vacci-
nations, such as those for yellow fever
and tuberculosis (BCG).
traveller＊s diarrhoea A disorder occur-
ring in people who are visiting foreign
countries. Episodes of diarrhoea range
in severity and are due to gastroenteritis.
Attention to hygiene, drinking bottled
water, and avoiding ice in drinks can
prevent a large proportion of episodes.
travel sickness See motion sickness.
trazodone An  antidepressant drug with
a strong sedative effect that is used to
treat depression accompanied by anxiety
TRAZODONE TRANSILLUMINATION
T560
or insomnia. Possible side effects include
drowsiness, constipation, dry mouth,
dizziness, and, rarely, priapism.
treatment Any measure that is taken to
prevent or cure a disease or disorder or
to relieve symptoms.
trematode The scientific name for any
fluke or schistosome.
trembling See tremor.
tremor  An involuntary, rhythmic, oscil-
lating movement in the muscles of part
of the body, most commonly those of
the hands, feet, jaw, tongue, or head.
Tremor is the result of rapidly alternat-
ing muscle contraction and relaxation.
Occasional tremors are experienced by
most people and are due to increased
production of the hormone  adrenaline
(epinephrine). A slight, persistent tre-
mor is common in elderly people.
Essential tremor, which runs in fami-
lies, is a slight-to-moderate tremor that
may be temporarily relieved by consum-
ing a small amount of alcohol or by
taking beta-blocker drugs.
Coarse tremor (4每5 muscle movements
per second), which is present at rest but
reduced during movement, is often a
sign of Parkinson＊s disease. An intention
tremor (tremor that is worse on move-
ment of the affected part) may be a sign
of cerebellar ataxia. Tremor may also be
caused by multiple sclerosis, Wilson＊s dis-
ease, mercury poisoning,  thyrotoxicosis,
or hepatic  encephalopathy; drugs, such
as  amfetamines  and  caffeine; and with-
drawal from drugs, including alcohol.
trench fever An infectious disease that
is now rare or unknown in most parts of
the world. The disease is caused by rick-
ettsiae spread by body  lice. Symptoms
include headache, muscle pains, and
fever, which may occur in bouts. Treat-
ment is with antibioticdrugs. 
trench foot See immersion foot.
trench mouth  See  gingivitis, acute
ulcerative.
trephine A hollow, cylindrical instru-
ment with a saw-toothed edge used for
cutting a circular hole, usually in bone. 
tretinoin A  topical drug that is chemi-
cally related to vitamin A and is used to
treat  acne and certain skin disorders
such as ichthyosis. Tretinoin may aggra-
vate acne in the first few weeks of
treatment but usually improves the
condition within 3每4 months. Possible
side effects include irritation, peeling,
and discoloration of the skin. Exposure
of the skin to sunlight while using
tretinoin may aggravate irritation and
can lead to sunburn.
trial, clinical A test on human volun-
teers of the effectiveness and safety of a
drug. A trial can also involve systematic
comparison of alternative forms of medi-
cal or surgical treatment for a particular
disorder. Patients involved in clinical tri-
als have to give their consent, and the
trials are approved and supervised by
an ethics committee.
triamcinolone A corticosteroid drug that
is used to treat inflammation of the
mouth, gums, skin, and joints;  asthma;
and certain blood disorders, such as
thrombocytopenia and leukaemia. 
triamterene A  diuretic drug used to
treat  hypertension and  oedema. Pos-
sible adverse effects include nausea,
vomiting, weakness, and rash.
tribavirin see ribavirin.
triceps muscle The muscle at the back
of the upper arm. At the upper end of
the triceps are 3 ※heads§; 1 is attachedto
the outer edge of the  scapula (shoul-
derblade), and the other 2 to either side
of the  humerus (upper-arm bone). The
lower part of the triceps is attached to
the olecranon process of the ulna (the
bony prominence on the elbow). Con-
traction of the muscle straightens the
arm. (See also biceps muscle.)
trichiasis An alteration in the direction
of eyelash growth, in which the lashes
grow inwards towards the eyeball. They
can rub against the eye, causing severe
discomfort and sometimes damage to
the cornea. Trachoma is a cause.
trichinosis An infestation with the lar-
vae of the  TRICHINELLA SPIRALIS worm,
usually acquired by eating undercooked
pork. Trichinosis is rare in the UK. Thor-
ough cooking of all pork products, and
freezing meat to a temperature below
每18∼C for 24 hours, helps to avoid infec-
tion. Slight infestation usually causes
no symptoms. However, heavy infesta-
tion may cause diarrhoea and vomiting
within a day or two of eating the infec-
ted meat, followed by fever, swelling
TREATMENT TRICHINOSIS
T561
around the eyelids, and severe muscle
pains, which may last for several weeks.
Trichinosis may be suspected from the
symptoms, and the diagnosis is con-
firmed by  blood tests, or by a muscle
biopsy. Treatment of the infestation is
with an anthelminticdrug.
trichomoniasis An infection caused by
the  protozoan TRICHOMONAS VAGINALIS.
Trichomoniasis is a common cause of
vaginitis. In some cases, the infection is
sexually transmitted.
In women, the causative organism
may inhabit the vagina for years without
causing symptoms. If symptoms occur,
they include painful inflammation of
the vagina and  vulva, and a greenish,
frothy, offensive-smelling discharge. Men
usually have no symptoms.
The diagnosis is made from exami-
nation of a sample of the discharge.
Diagnosis usually difficult in men. Treat-
ment is with metronidazole. The sexual
partner or partners of an infected per-
son should be treated at the same time
to prevent reinfection.
trichotillomania The habit of cons-
tantly pulling out one＊s hair. It can be
associated with severe mental handicap
or with a psychotic illness. It may also
occur in psychologically disturbed chil-
dren. The sufferer typically pulls, twists,
and breaks off chunks of hair from the
scalp, leaving bald patches; occasionally,
pubic hair is pulled out. Children some-
times eat the removed hair, which may
form a hairball in the stomach, known
medically as a trichobezoar (see bezoar).
Treatment depends on the cause, and
may consist of  psychotherapy or  anti-
psychoticdrugs. 
trichuriasis A parasitic infestation with
the tropical worm  TRICHURIS TRICHURIA
(whipworm). Children are most com-
monly affected. Infestation occurs when
eggs are ingested and develop into
adult worms in the intestines. Severe
infestation may cause bloody diarrhoea,
abdominal pain, and weight loss. Treat-
ment is with anthelminticdrugs.
triclosan An antiseptic.
tricuspid incompetence Failure ofthe
tricuspid  valve to close fully,allowing
blood to leak back into the right atrium
when the right ventricle  contracts. The
condition, which
is also known as
tricuspid insuffic-
iency, reduces the
pumping effici-
ency of the heart.
The usual cause is
pulmonary hyper-
tension, but more
rarely,it follows
rheumatic fever,
or, in intravenous
drug users, abac-
terial infection of
the heart.
Tricuspid incom-
petence results in
symptoms of right-
sided heart failure, notably  oedema of
the ankles and abdomen. The liver is
swollen and tender, and veins in the
neck are distended.
A diagnosis is made from the symp-
toms, from hearing a heart  murmur
through a stethoscope, and by tests that
may include an ECG, chest X-rays, echo-
cardiography, and cardiac catheterization.
Treatment with  diuretic drugs  and  ACE
inhibitors often relieves the symptoms.
tricuspid stenosis Narrowing of the
opening of the  tricuspid valve, usually
caused by a previous attack of rheumatic
fever.Tricuspid stenosis is uncommon
and often occurs with another heart-
valve disorder. For example,  tricuspid
incompetence may also occur in intra-
venous drug users who have a bacterial
infection of the heart. Tricuspid stenosis
causes enlargement of the right atrium.
The symptoms and diagnosis are simi-
lar to those of tricuspid incompetence.
Treatment is with  diuretic drugs and
sometimes a digitalisdrug. Heart-valve
surgery is sometimes needed.
tricuspid valve A valve in the  heart
consisting of 3 flaps that lies between
the right atrium and the right ventricle.
It ensures that blood flow from the atri-
um to the ventricle is in 1 direction only.
tricyclic antidepressants A type of
antidepressant drug. Tricyclic antidepres-
sants prevent  neurotransmitters in the
brain from being reabsorbed, thereby
increasing their level. Examples are ami-
triptyline, clomipramine, and imipramine.
TRICYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANTS TRICHOMONIASIS
T
Tricuspid
valve
TRICUSPID VALVE
Aortic
valve
STRUCTURE OF HEART 
Right
ventricle562
trifluoperazine An  antipsychotic drug
used to treat schizophrenia.
trigeminal nerve The 5th cranial nerve.
A trigeminal nerve arises from the brain-
stem. Both nerves divide into 3 branches
that supply sensation to the face, scalp,
nose, teeth, lining of the mouth, upper
eyelid, sinuses, and the front portion of
the tongue. They stimulate  saliva and
tear production and contraction of  jaw
muscles for chewing.
trigeminal neuralgia A disorder of the
trigeminal nerve in which brief episodes
of severe, stabbing pain affect the
cheek, lips, gums, or chin on 1 side of
the face. The disorder usually occurs
over age 50. Pain may come in bouts
that last for weeks at a time. The cause
is uncertain, and pain is often brought
on by touching the face, eating, drink-
ing, or talking. Analgesic drugs may be
tried, but often, carbamazepine is more
effective. If this fails, surgery may help.
trigger finger Locking of 1 or several
fingers in a bent position due to inflam-
mation of the sheath enclosing the tendon
of the affected finger. The finger is usually
tender at the base and slightly swollen
over the tendon. Treatment involves
local injection of a  corticosteroid drug
or, if this is unsuccessful, surgery.
triglyceride A type of simple fat (see
fats and oils) made up of a molecule of
glycerol and 3 molecules of fatty acids.
Triglycerides are the main type of fat
found in stores of body fat.
trimeprazine Also called alimemazine.
An  antihistamine drug used to relieve
itching in allergic conditions, and as a
premedication in children. Side effects
are typical of antihistamines.
trimester A period of 3 months; human
pregnancy is conventionally divided into
3 trimesters.
trimethoprim An antibacterial drug used
to treat a range of infections, most com-
monly those of the urinary tract. Possible
side effects include rash, itching, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhoea, and a sore tongue.
trimipramine A tricyclic antidepressant
drug used to treat depression accompa-
nied by anxiety or insomnia. Possible side
effects include dry mouth, blurred vision,
dizziness, constipation, and nausea.
triple vaccine See DPT vaccination.
triprolidine An antihistamine drug  that
is used to treat allergy, as an ingredient
of cough and cold remedies, and to
treat or prevent allergic reactions to
certain foods or blood transfusions. Pos-
sible side effects of triprolidine include
dry mouth, dizziness, difficulty in pass-
ing urine, and hyperactivity.
trismus Involuntary contraction of the
jaw muscles, which causes the mouth to
become tightly closed. Commonly known
as lockjaw, it may occur as a symptom
of  tetanus,  tonsillitis,  mumps, or acute
ulcerative  gingivitis and other dental
problems affecting the back teeth. Treat-
ment is of the underlying cause.
trisomy The presence of an extra chro-
mosome within a person＊s cells, making
3 of a particular chromosome instead of
the usual 2. A fault during  meiosis to
form egg or sperm cells leaves an egg or
sperm with an extra chromosome. When
the egg or sperm takes part in fertiliza-
tion, the resulting embryo inherits an
extra chromosome in each of its cells.
The most common trisomy is of
chromosome 21 (Down＊s syndrome).
Trisomy 18 (Edward＊s syndrome) and
trisomy 13 (Patau＊s syndrome) are less
common; trisomy 8 and trisomy 22 are
very rare. Partial trisomy, with only part
of a chromosome in triplicate, also
occurs. Full trisomies cause abnorma-
lities such as skeletal and heart defects
and  learning difficulties. Except in
Down＊s syndrome, babies usually die in
early infancy. The effects of partial tri-
somies depend on the amount of extra
chromosomal material present. 
Diagnosis is made by  chromosome
analysis of cells, which may be obtained
from the fetus by amniocentesis or after
the birth. There is no specific treatment.
Parents of an affected child should seek
genetic counselling.
trisomy 21 syndrome Another name
for Down＊s syndrome.
trochlear nerve The 4th cranial nerve.
The 2 trochlear nerves arise in the
brainstem, 1 on each side of the mid-
brain, and enter the eye sockets
through gaps in the skull bones. Each
trochlear nerve controls 1 of the 2 sup-
erior oblique muscles, which rotate the
eyes downwards and outwards.
TRIFLUOPERAZINE TROCHLEAR NERVE
T563
trophoblastic tumour A growth aris-
ing from the tissues that develop into
the placenta. The most common type of
trophoblastic tumour is a  hydatidiform
mole. (See also choriocarcinoma.)
tropical diseases Diseases prevalent
in the tropics because of living condi-
tions and diet include  malnutrition,
measles,  diphtheria,  tuberculosis,  typhoid
fever,  shigellosis,  cholera,  amoebiasis,
and  tapeworm infestation. Diseases
spread through the tropics by insects
include  malaria,  yellow fever,  sleeping
sickness, and leishmaniasis. Exposure to
strong sunlight in the tropics causes an
increased tendency to  skin cancer, and
may lead to pinguecula and pterygium.
tropical ulcer An area of persistent skin
and tissue loss caused by infection with
1 or more organisms. The condition is
most common in malnourished people
living in the tropics. Treatment is clean-
ingand dressing of the ulcer, a course of
antibiotic drugs, and a high protein diet.
The ulcer usually heals but may scar.
tropicamide A drug used to dilate the
pupil. Adverse effects of the drug include
blurred vision, increased sensitivity to
light, stinging, and, rarely, dry mouth,
flushing, and glaucoma.
trunk The central part of the body, com-
prising the chest and abdomen. The
term also refers to any large blood ves-
sel or nerve, from which smaller vessels
or nerves branch off.
truss An elastic, canvas, or padded metal
appliance used to hold an abdominal
hernia in place. Trusses are only used if
corrective surgery cannot be undertaken.
trypanosomiasis A tropical disease cau-
sed by TRYPANOSOMA parasites. (See also
sleeping sickness; Chagas＊ disease.)
tsetse fly bites The bites of tsetse flies,
which are found in Africa, can be painful.
The flies, resembling brown houseflies,
spread sleeping sickness.
T-tube cholangiography An  imaging
technique performed to check that there
are no  gallstones left in the bile duct
after a cholecystectomy. AT-shaped rub-
ber tube is inserted into the bile duct
during the surgery. A week or so later,
contrast medium is inserted into the
tube and X-rays are taken.
tubal ligation See sterilization, female.
tubal pregnancy See ectopic pregnancy.
tubercle A grey, nodular mass found in
tissues affected by  tuberculosis. The
term also refers to a small rounded pro-
trusion on the surface of a bone.
tuberculin tests Skin tests used to
determine whether or not a person has
been exposed to the bacterium that
causes tuberculosis. Tuberculin tests are
carried out for diagnosis of tuberculosis,
and before  BCGvaccination. A small
amount of tuberculin (purified protein
from the bacteria) is injected into the
skin. Afew days later, the skin reaction,
if any, is noted. A reaction indicates
previous exposure.
tuberculosis An infectious disease, com-
monly called TB, caused in humans by
the bacterium  MYCOBACTERIUM TUBER-
CULOSIS. TB is usually transmitted in
airborne droplets expelled when an infec-
ted  person coughs or sneezes. An
inhaled droplet enters the lungs and
the bacteria begin multiplying. The
immune system usually seals off the
infection at this point, but in about 5 per
cent of cases the infection spreads to the
lymph nodes. It may also spread to
other organs through the bloodstream,
which may lead to miliary tuberculosis,
a potentially fatal form of the disease.
In about another 5 per cent of cases,
bacteria held in a dormant state by the
immune system become reactivated
months, or even years, later. The infec-
tion may then progressively damage the
lungs, forming cavities.
The primary infection is usually with-
out symptoms. Progressive infection in
the lungs causes coughing (sometimes
bringing up blood), chest pain, short-
ness of breath, fever and sweating, poor
appetite, and weight loss.  Pleural effu-
sion or pneumothorax may develop. The
lung damage may be fatal. 
A diagnosis is made from the symp-
toms and signs, from a chest X-ray, and
from tests on the sputum. Alternatively,
a bronchoscopy may also be carried out
to obtain samples for culture.
Treatment is usually with a course of 3
or 4 drugs, taken daily for 2 months, fol-
lowed by daily doses of  isoniazid and
rifampicin for 4每6 months. However, TB
bacteria are increasingly resistant to the
TUBERCULOSIS TROPHOBLASTIC TUMOUR
T564
drugs used in treatment, and others may
have to be used and treatment carried
out for a longer period. If the full course
of drugs is taken, most patients recover.
TB can be prevented by BCG vaccina-
tion, which is offered routinely at birth
or age 10每14. Any contacts of an infected
person are traced and examined, and, if
infected, are treated early to reduce the
risk of the infection spreading.
tuberosity A prominent area on a bone
to which tendons are attached.
tuberous sclerosis An inherited disor-
der that affects the skin and  nervous
system. An acne-like condition of the
face,  epilepsy, and  learning difficulties
often occur. Noncancerous tumours of
the brain, kidney, retina, and heart may
also develop. There is no cure, and
treatment aims only to relieve symp-
toms. In serious cases, death occurs
before the age of 30. Genetic counselling
is recommended for affected families.
tuboplasty Surgery in which a damaged
fallopian tube is repaired to treat infertility.
It may be performed by microsurgery.
tularaemia A bacterial infection of wild
animals that is sometimes transmitted
to humans. Tularaemia does not occur
in the UK but is seen in North America.
It may result from contact with an
infected animal or carcass, or a tick, flea,
fly, or louse bite.A diagnosis is made by
blood tests. Treatment is with antibiotic
drugs. Tularaemia is fatal in 5 per cent
of untreated cases.
tumbu fly bites A cause of myiasis.
tumour A term that describes any swel-
ling but which is generally used to refer
to an abnormal mass of tissue that forms
when cells in a specific area reproduce at
an increased rate. Tumours can be  can-
cerous or noncancerous.
tumour-specific antigen A substance
secreted by a specific type of  tumour
that can be detected in the blood and
may be used to help monitor a patient＊s
response to therapy. Alpha-fetoprotein is
an example of a tumour-specific antigen.
tuning fork tests Hearing tests carried
out to diagnose conductive deafness. In
the Weber test, a vibrating tuning fork is
held against the forehead. If there is
conductive hearing loss, the sound
seems louder in the affected ear. In the
Rinne test, a vibrating tuning fork is
held first near the ear, and then against
the bone behind it. If it sounds louder
when held against the bone, there is
conductive hearing loss.
tunnel vision Loss of the peripheral
visual field to the extent that only
objects straight ahead can be seen
clearly. Tunnel vision is most commonly
caused by chronic  glaucoma.  Retinitis
pigmentosa is another possible cause.
Turner＊s syndrome A disorder caused
by a chromosomal abnormality that only
affects females. The abnormality may
arise in 1 of 3 ways: affected females
may have only 1 X chromosome instead
of 2; they may have 1 normal and 1
defective X chromosome; or they may
have a mixture of cells (see mosaicism),
in which some of the cells are missing
an X chromosome, some have extra
chromosomes, and others have the
normal complement of chromosomes.
Turner＊s syndrome causes short stature;
webbing of the skin of the neck; absence
or retarded development of sexual char-
acteristics;  amenorrhea,  coarctation of
the aorta, and abnormalities of the eyes
and bones. 
Treatment with growth hormone from
infancy helps girls with Turner＊s syn-
drome to achieve near normal height.
Coarctation of the aorta is treated sur-
gically. Treatment with oestrogen drugs
induces menstruation, but it does not
make affected girls fertile.
TURP The abbreviation for transurethral
resection of the prostate. TURP is a sur-
gical procedure in which the central
part of an enlarged  prostate gland is
removed (see  prostate, enlarged). A
viewing instrument called a resecto-
scope is passed along the urethra until
it reaches the prostate.A heated wire
loop, or sometimes a cutting edge, is
inserted through the resectoscope and
used to cut away excess prostate tissue.
twins Two offspring resulting from one
pregnancy. Monozygotic, or identical,
twins develop when a single fertilized
egg divides at an early stage of develop-
ment. Incomplete division of the egg
results in conjoined twins (see Siamese
twins). Monozygotic twins share the
same placenta. Dizygotic twins develop
TUBEROSITY TWINS
Twhen 2 eggs are fertilized at the same
time. They each have a placenta and
may be of different sexes. Twins occur in
about 1 in 80 pregnancies. (See also
pregnancy, multiple.)
twins, conjoined Identical  twins physi-
cally joined due to a failure to separate
during development from a single fertil-
ized egg. Also called Siamese twins.
twitch See fasciculation; tic.
tympanic membrane The medical term
for the eardrum.
tympanometry A type of  hearing test
used to establish the cause of conduc-
tive  deafness. During the test, a probe
that contains a tone generator, a micro-
phone, and an air pump is introduced
into the outer-ear canal. The air pres-
sure in the ear is varied and tones are
played into it. The tone pattern reflect-
ed from the  eardrum and received by
the microphone sreveals whether the
eardrum is moving normally. The test is
particularly useful in children because it
does not rely on a response from the
person being tested. 
tympanoplasty An operation on the
ear to treat conductive  deafness by
repairing a hole in the eardrum (see
myringoplasty) or by repositioning or
reconstructing diseased ossicles.
typhoid fever An infectious disease
contracted by eating food or drinking
water contaminated with the bacterium
SALMONELLA TYPHI. Typhoid fever is
spread by drinking water contaminated
with sewage, by
flies carrying the
bacteria from fae-
ces to food, or by
infected people
handling food.
The 1st symptom,
severe headache,
occurs 7每14 days
after infection and
is followed by fever,
loss of appetite,
malaise, abdominal
tenderness, consti-
pation, and often
delirium. Diarrhoea
soon develops. In
the 2nd week of ill-
ness, pink spots
develop on the chest and abdomen,
and the liver and  spleen enlarge. Diag-
nosis is confirmed by a blood test or by
obtaining a  culture of typhoid bacteria
from blood, faeces, or urine. Treatment
is with  antibiotic drugs. In rare cases,
the bacterium continues to be excreted
after recovery has taken place.
typhus Any of a group of infectious dis-
eases with similar symptoms that are
caused by rickettsiae and are spread by
insects or similar animals.
Except in some highland areas of
tropical Africa and South America, epi-
demic typhus is rare today. Endemic
typhus, also called murine typhus, is a
disease of  rats that is occasionally
spread to humans by fleas; sporadic
cases occur in North and Central Amer-
ica. Scrub typhus is spread by mites and
occurs in India and Southeast Asia.
The symptoms and complications of
all types of typhus are similar. Severe
headache, back and limb pain, cough-
ing, and constipation develop suddenly
and are followed by high fever, a
measles-like rash, confusion, and pros-
tration. Left untreated, the condition
may be fatal, especially in elderly or
debilitated people.
A diagnosis is made by  blood tests,
and treatment is with  antibiotic drugs
and supportive treatment.
typing A general term for procedures by
which blood or tissues are classified
(see blood groups; tissue-typing).
565
TYPING TWINS, CONJOINED
T
TWINS
Placenta Placenta
Uterus
Cervix
Shared
placenta
NONIDENTICAL TWINS  IDENTICAL TWINS
Uterus
Cervix566
ulcer An open sore appearing on the
skin or on a  mucous membrane that
results from the destruction of surface
tissue. Ulcers may be shallow, or deep
and crater-shaped, and they are usually
inflamed and painful.
Skin ulcers most commonly occur on
the leg (see  leg ulcer), usually as the
result of inadequate blood supply to, or
drainage from, the limb. In some cases
skin cancers, particularly basal cell car-
cinomas or  squamous cell carcinomas,
may be ulcerated. Rarely, a cancer may
develop in the skin at the edge of a
longstanding ulcer.
The most common types of ulcers of
the mucous membranes are mouth ul-
cers, peptic ulcers, and those that occur
in ulcerative colitis.
Ulcers may also affect the skin or
mucous membranes of the genitalia
(see genital ulcer). Most genital ulcers are
caused by sexually transmitted infec-
tions. Examples of this type of ulcer are
hard chancres (see chancre, hard), which
develop during the first stage of  syph-
ilis, and soft chancres (see  chancroid).
In addition, ulcers may develop on the
cornea (see corneal ulcers).
ulcer, aphthous A small, painful  ulcer
that occurs, alone or in a group, on the
inside of the cheek or lip or underneath
the tongue. Aphthous ulcers are most
common between the ages of 10 and 40
and affect more women than men. The
most severely affected people have con-
tinuously recurring ulcers; others have
just 1 or 2 ulcers each year.
Each ulcer is usually small and oval,
with a grey centre and a surrounding
red, inflamed halo. The ulcer, which
usually lasts for 1每2 weeks, may be a
hypersensitive reaction to haemolytic
streptococcus  bacteria. Other factors
commonly associated with the occur-
rence of these ulcers are minor injuries
(such as at an injection site or from a
toothbrush), acute stress, or allergies
(such as allergic  rhinitis). In women,
aphthous ulcers are most common dur-
ing the premenstrual period. They may
also be more likely if other family mem-
bers suffer from recurrent ulceration.
Analgesic mouth gels or mouthwashes
may ease the pain of an aphthous ulcer.
Some ointments form a waterproof cov-
ering that protects the ulcer while it is
healing. Ulcers heal by themselves, but
a doctor may prescribe a paste contain-
ing a corticosteroid drug or a mouthwash
containing an  antibiotic drug to speed
up the healing process.
ulceration The formation or presence
of 1 or more ulcers.
ulcerative colitis Chronic inflammation
and ulceration of the lining of the colon
and rectum, or, especially at the start of
the condition, of the rectum alone. The
cause of ulcerative colitis is unknown,
but the condition is most common in
young and middle-aged adults.
The main symptom of ulcerative coli-
tis is bloody diarrhoea; and the faeces
may also contain mucus. In severe
cases, the diarrhoea and bleeding are
extensive, and there may be abdominal
pain and tenderness, fever, and general
malaise. The incidence of attacks varies
considerably. Most commonly, the at-
tacks occur at intervals of a few months.
However, in some cases, there may be
only a single episode.
Ulcerative colitis may lead to anaemia,
caused by blood loss. Other complica-
tions include a toxic form of megacolon,
which may become life-threatening;
rashes; aphthous  ulcers;  arthritis;  con-
junctivitis; or  uveitis. There is also an
increased risk of cancer of the colon
developing (see colon, cancer of).
A diagnosis is based on examination
of the rectum and lower colon (see
sigmoidoscopy) or the entire colon (see
colonoscopy), or is made by a barium
enema (see barium X-ray examination).
During sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy,
a biopsy may be performed. Samples of
faeces may be taken for laboratory anal-
ysis in order to exclude the possibility
of infection by bacteria or parasites.
Blood tests may also be needed.
ULCER ULCERATIVE COLITIS
U
UMedical treatments of ulcerative colitis
include  corticosteroid drugs and  sulfa-
salazine and its derivatives.  Colectomy
may be required for a severe attack that
fails to respond to other treatments, or
to avoid colonic cancer in those people
who are at high risk.
ulcer-healing drugs A group of drugs
that are used to treat or prevent peptic
ulcers. The eradication of HELICOBACTER
PYLORI infection by treatment with anti-
biotic drugs and a drug to reduce acid
secretion is now the preferred treat-
ment for peptic ulceration.
Ulcer-healing drugs work in several
ways.  H2-receptor antagonists function
by blocking the effects of histamine, 
an action that reduces acid secretion in
the stomach, thereby promoting the
healingof ulcers. Taking  antacid drugs
regularly may be effective in healing
duodenal ulcers because the drugs
neutralize excess acid. Omeprazole and
misoprostol work by reducing acid
secretion. Other ulcer-healing drugs,
such as sucralfate, are believed to form
a protective barrier over the ulcer,
allowing healing of the underlying tis-
sues to take place.
The choice of ulcer-healing drug dep-
ends on the length of time symptoms
have been present and the appearance
of the ulcer during endoscopy. In many
cases of recent onset, a course of acid-
blocking drugs or antacids will give
rapid relief. Recurrent ulcers usually
require treatment with antibiotic drugs.
ulna The longer of the 2 bones of the
forearm; the other is the  radius. With
the arms straight at the sides, palm for-
wards, the ulna is the inner bone (that
is, nearer the trunk) running down the
forearm on the side of the little finger. 
The upper end of the ulna articulates
with the radius and extends into a
rounded projection (known as the olec-
ranon process) that fits around the
lower end of the humerus to form part
of the elbow joint. The lower end of the
ulna articulates with the carpals (wrist
bones) and lower part of the radius.
ulna, fracture of A fracture of the ulna,
1 of the 2 bones of the forearm. Ulnar
fractures typically occur across the shaft
or at the olecranon process.
A fracture to the shaft usually results
from a blow to the forearm or a fall onto
the hand. Sometimes the radius is frac-
tured at the same time (see  radius,
fracture of). Surgery is usually needed
to reposition the broken bone ends and
fix them together using either a plate
and screws or a long nail down the cen-
tre of the bone. The arm is immobilized
in a  cast, with the elbow at a right-
angle, until the fracture heals.
A fracture of the olecranon process is
usually the result of a fall onto the
elbow. If the bone ends are not dis-
placed, the arm is immobilized in a 
cast that holds the elbow at a right-
angle. If the bone ends are displaced,
however, they are fitted together and
fixed with a metal screw.
ulnar nerve One of the principal nerves
of the arm. The ulnar nerve, a branch of
the  brachial plexus, runs down the full
length of the arm and into the hand.
The ulnar nerve controls muscles that
move the thumb and fingers. It also
conveys sensation from the 5th finger,
part of the 4th finger, and the palm.
A blow to the olecranon process, over
which the ulnar nerve passes, causes a
pins-and-needles sensation and pain in
the forearm and 4th and 5th fingers.
Persistent numbness and weakness in
areas controlled by the ulnar nerve may
be caused by an abnormal bony out-
growth from the humerus. This may be
due to osteoarthritis or a fracture of the
humerus, and surgery is needed to
relieve the pressure on the nerve. Per-
manent damage to the ulnar nerve can
result in claw-hand.
ultrasound Sound with a frequency that
is greater than the human ear＊s upper
limit of perception: that is, higher than
20,000 hertz (cycles per second). Ultra-
sound used in medicine for diagnosis or
treatment is typically in the range of
1每15 million hertz (see ultrasound scan-
ning; ultrasound treatment).
ultrasound scanning A diagnostic tech-
nique in which very high frequency sound
waves are passed into the body and the
reflected echoes analysed to build a
picture of the internal organs or of a
fetus in the uterus. The procedure is
painless and considered safe.
567
ULTRASOUND SCANNING ULCER-HEALING DRUGS
U568
Ultrasonic waves are emitted by a trans-
ducer, which is placed on the skin over
the part of the body to be viewed. The
transducer contains a crystal that con-
verts an electric current into sound waves.
These pass readily through soft tissues
andfluids, making this procedure useful
for examining fluid-filled or soft organs.
One of the most common uses of ultra-
soundis to view the uterus and fetus, at
any time during pregnancy, but often at
18每20 weeks. The age, size, and growth
rate of the fetus can be determined;
multiple pregnancies detected; and 
certain problems, such as  neural tube
defects, diagnosed. Scans may be taken
early in pregnancy if problems, such as
an ectopic pregnancy, are suspected.
Ultrasound scanning can also be used
in newborn babies to examine the brain
through a gap in the skull (for example,
to investigate  hydrocephalus). Ultra-
sound can help to diagnose disorders
such as cirrhosis, gallstones, hydroneph-
rosis, and  pancreatitis, as well as
problems in the thyroid gland, breasts,
bladder, testes, ovaries, spleen, and
eyes. The techniqueis also used during
needle biopsy to help guide the needle.
Doppler ultrasound is a modified form
of ultrasound that uses the  Doppler
effect to investigate moving objects.
This can be used to examine the fetal
heartbeat and to obtain information
about the rate of blood flow in vessels.
ultrasound treatment The use of ultra-
sound to treat soft-tissue injuries (such
as injuries to ligaments, muscles, and
tendons). Ultrasound treatment reduces
inflammation and speeds up healing. It
is thought to work by improving blood
flow in tissues under the skin.
ultraviolet light Invisible light from the
part of the electromagnetic spectrum
immediately beyond the violet end of
the visible light spectrum. Long wave-
length ultraviolet light is termed UVA,
intermediate UVB, and short UVC.
Ultraviolet light occurs in sunlight, but
much of it is absorbed by the  ozone
layer. The ultraviolet light (mainly UVA)
that reaches the earth＊s surface causes
the tanning effects of sunlight and the
production of  vitamin D in the skin. It
can have harmful effects, such as  skin
cancer (see sunlight, adverse effects of). 
Ultraviolet light is sometimes used in
phototherapy. A mercury-vapour lamp
(Wood＊s light) can also produce ultravi-
olet light. This is used to diagnose skin
conditions such as  tinea because it
causes the infected area to fluoresce.
umbilical cord The ropelike structure
connecting the fetus to the placenta that
supplies the fetus with oxygen and
nutrients from the mother＊s circulation.
The umbilical cord is usually 40每60 cm
long and contains 2 arteries and a vein.
umbilical hernia A soft swelling at the
umbilicus due toprotrusion of the ab-
dominal contents
through a weak area
of abdominal wall.
Umbilical hernias
are quite common
in newborn babies
and  occur  twice 
as often in boys as 
in girls. The swel-
ling increases in
size when the baby
cries, and it may
cause discomfort.
Umbilical hernias
usually disappear
without treatment
by age 2. If a her-
nia is still present
at age 4, surgery
may be needed.
ULTRASOUND TREATMENTUMBILICAL HERNIA
U
ULTRASOUND SCANNING
Radiographer
ULTRASOUND SCANNING IN PREGNANCY
Gel
Monitor
Ultrasound
transducerouter layer; muscular middle layer; and
inner watertight layer. Each ureter is sup-
plied by blood vessels and nerves. Urine
flows down the ureters partly from grav-
ity but mainly as a result of peristalsis.
Some people are born with double
ureters, on 1 or both sides of the body.
This sometimes causes  reflux of urine,
incontinence, or infection.
ureteric colic See renal colic.
ureterolithotomy The surgical removal
of a stone (see  calculus, urinary tract)
stuck in a  ureter. It is not commonly
needed because  lithotripsy and  cysto-
scopy can be used to deal with stones.
urethra The tube through which urine is
excreted from the bladder. In females, it
is short and opens to the outside in
front of the vagina. In males, it is much
longer,is surrounded by the prostate
gland at its upper end, and forms a
channelthrough the length of the penis.
urethral dilatation The procedure in
which a  urethral stricture in a male is
widened by inserting a slim, round-
tipped instrument through the opening
of the urethra at the tip of the penis.
urethral discharge A fluid that flows
from the urethra in some cases of ure-
thritis caused by infection.
urethral stricture A rare condition in
which the male  urethra becomes nar-
rowed and sometimes shortened as a
result of shrinkage of scar tissue within
its walls. Scar tissue may form after
injury to the urethra or after persistent
urethritis. The stricture may make passing
urine or ejaculation difficult or painful,
and it may cause some deformation of
the penis when erect. Treatment is usu-
ally by urethral dilatation.
urethral syndrome, acute A set of
symptoms, usually affecting women,
that are very similar to cystitis but which
occur in the absence of infection.
urethritis Inflammation of the  urethra,
usually due to an infection but some-
times having other causes.
Urethritis may be caused by various
infectious organisms, including the bac-
terium that causes  gonorrhoea.  Non-
gonococcal urethritis may be caused by
any of a large number of different types
of microorganisms. Urethritis may also
be caused by damage from an accident
Umbilical hernias sometimes develop
in adults, especially in women after
childbirth. Surgery may be necessary for
a large, persistent, or disfiguring hernia.
umbilicus The scar on the abdomen
that marks the site of attachment of the
umbilical cord to the  fetus. It is com-
monly called the navel.
unconscious A specific part of the mind
in which ideas, memories, perceptions,
or feelings that a person is not currently
aware of are stored and processed. The
contents of the unconscious mind are
not easily retrieved, in contrast to those
of the subconscious. (See also Freudian
theory; Jungian theory.)
unconsciousness An abnormal loss of
awareness of self and one＊s surroundings
due to a reduced level of activity in the
reticular formation of the brainstem. An
unconscious person can be roused only
with difficulty or not at all. Unconscious-
ness may be brief and light, as in fainting,
or deep and prolonged (see coma).
underbite See prognathism.
unsaturated fats See fats and oils.
unstable bladder Another name for
irritable bladder.
uraemia The presence of excess  urea
and other chemical waste products in
the blood, caused by kidney failure.
uranium A radioactive metallic element
that does not occur naturally in its pure
form but is widely found in ores such as
pitchblende, carnotite, and uraninite.
Radioactive decay of uranium yields a
series of radioactive products, including
radium and  radon. During the various
decay stages,  radiation is emitted. Ura-
nium is also poisonous.
urea A waste product of the breakdown
of proteins by the liver that is transpor-
ted to the kidneys and eliminated in the
urine. Urea is also formed in the body
from the breakdown of cell proteins. Kid-
ney failure impairs the kidneys＊ ability
to eliminate urea and leads to uraemia;
measurement of blood levels of urea is a
routine kidney function test. Urea is
used in various creams and ointments
to treat skin disorders such as psoriasis.
ureter One of the 2 tubes that carry urine
from the  kidneys to the  bladder. Each
ureter is 25每30 cm long. There are 3 lay-
ers in the walls of the ureters: a fibrous
569
URETHRITIS UMBILICUS
U570
or from a  catheter or  cystoscope. Other
possible causes include irritant chemi-
cals, such as antiseptics and some
spermicidal preparations. Treatment of
infection is with antibiotic drugs.
urethrocele An anatomical abnormality
in females caused by a weakness in the
tissues in the front wall of the  vagina.
The urethra bulges backwards and down-
wards into the vagina. A urethrocele may
be congenital but more commonly devel-
opsafter childbirth.
-uria A suffix relating to urine.
uric acid A waste product of the break-
down of  nucleic acids in body cells. A
small amount is also produced by the
digestion of foods rich in nucleic acids,
such as liver, kidney, and other offal.
Most uric acid produced in the body
passes to the kidneys, which excrete it
in the urine, but some passes into the
intestine, where it is broken down into
chemicals excreted in the faeces. 
When uric acid excretion is disrupted,
for example by kidney disease, it may
result in hyperuricaemia.
urinal A container for  urine, useful for
bedridden men (women use a bedpan).
urinalysis Tests on urine, including mea-
surements of its physical characteristics
(such as colour, cloudiness, and concen-
tration), microscopic examination, and
chemical testing such as dipstick urinaly-
sis. This involves dipping a test stick into
a urine sample; chemically impregnated
squares on the stick change colour in the
presence of test substances. The inten-
sity of colour change shows the amount
of the substance present in the urine.
Urinalysis can be used to check kidney
function, and to help detect and diag-
nose urinary tract and other disorders.
urinary diversion Any surgical proced-
ure (temporary or permanent) that allows
urine flow when the outlet channel of the
urinary tract, via the bladder and urethra,
is obstructed or cannot be used, or the
bladder has been surgically removed.
Temporary urinary diversion is some-
times needed when urine passage is
blocked by  prostate gland enlargement
or by urethral stricture. A tube is passed
directly into the bladder through a
small opening in the abdomen (see
catheterization, urinary). Temporary div-
ersion is also required after some urinary
tract operations; a small tube is intro-
duced into the kidney and brought to
the abdominal surface. 
Permanent diversion is needed when
the bladder has been surgically removed,
when neurological bladder control is
severely disturbed, such as after severe
spinal injury, or if there is an irreparable
fistula between a female patient＊s bladder
or urethra and her vagina. A section of
the ileum is removed to create a substi-
tute bladder, into one end of which the
surgeon implants the ureters. The other
end of the substitute bladder is then
brought out through an incision in the
abdominal wall. The patient wears a bag
attached to the skin to collect urine.
urinary retention Inability to empty the
bladder or difficulty in doing so. Urinary
retention may be complete (urine can-
not be passed voluntarily at all) or
incomplete (the bladder fails to empty
completely). In males, causes include
phimosis, urethral stricture, prostatitis, a
URETHROCELE URINARY RETENTION
U
URINALYSIS
Colour
chart
Test stick
is dipped
in urine
sample
Urine
sample
Squares on
test stick are
matched to
colour chart
DIPSTICK-URINALYSISstone in the bladder (see calculus, urin-
ary tract), and enlargement or tumour
of the prostate (see  prostate, enlarged;
prostate, cancer of). In females, causes
include pressure on the urethra from
uterine fibroids or from a fetus. In either
sex, the cause may be a bladder tumour.
Retention may also be due to defective
functioning of the nerve pathways sup-
plying the bladder as a result of general
or spinal  anaesthesia, drugs affecting
the bladder, surgery, injury to the nerve
pathways, or disease of the spinal cord.
Complete retention causes discomfort
and lower abdominal pain, except when
nerve pathways are defective. The full
bladder can be felt above the pubic bone.
However, chronic or partial retention
may not cause any serious symptoms.
Retention can lead to kidney damage
and, often, a urinary tract infection.
Treatment of retention is by catheteri-
zation (see catheterization, urinary). The
cause is then investigated. Obstruction
can usually be treated; if nerve damage
is the cause, permanent or intermittent
catheterization is sometimes necessary.
urinary system See urinary tract.
urinary tract The part of the body con-
cerned with the formation and excretion
of  urine. The urinary tract consists of
the kidneys (with their blood and nerve
supplies), the renal pelvises (funnel-
shaped ducts that channel urine from
the kidneys), the  ureters, the  bladder,
and the urethra. 
The kidneys make urine by filtering
blood. The urine collects in the renal
pelvises and is then passed down the
ureters into the bladder by the actions
of gravity and peristalsis. Urine is stored
in the bladder until there is a sufficient
amount present to stimulate  micturi-
tion. When the bladder contracts, the
urine is expelled through the urethra.
urinary tract infection An infection
anywhere in the  urinary tract. It has
differing symptoms, depending on the
area affected. Urethritis causes a burn-
ing sensation when urine is being
passed. Cystitis causes a frequent urge
to pass urine, lower abdominal pain,
haematuria, and, often, general malaise
with a mild fever. Pyelonephritis causes
fever and pain in the back under the
ribs. Cystitis and pyelonephritis are
URINARY TRACT
571
URINARY TRACT INFECTION URINARY SYSTEM
U
Adrenal gland
(cross section)
Kidney
(whole)
Renal
artery
Prostate
gland
Urethra
Aorta
Kidney (cross section)
Renal vein
Peritoneum folded back
Ureter
Bladder
Ureter Bladder
MALE FEMALE
Urethraalmost always the result of a bacterial
infection. Urethritis is often due to a
sexually transmitted infection, such as
gonorrhoea, but may have other causes.
Urethral infections are more common
in men. Infections further up the urinary
tract are more common in women. In
men, there is often a predisposing fac-
tor, such as an enlarged prostate gland
(see prostate, enlarged). In women, preg-
nancyis a risk factor.
In both sexes, causes of urinary tract
infections include stones (see  calculus,
urinary tract), bladder tumours, congeni-
tal abnormalities of the urinary tract, or
defective bladder emptying as a result
of  spina bifida or a  spinal injury. The
risks of developing a urinary tract infec-
tion can be reduced by strict personal
hygiene, drinking lots of fluids, and reg-
ularly emptying the bladder.
Urethritis can lead to the formation of
a urethral stricture. Cystitis usually only
causes complications if the infection
spreads to the  kidneys. Pyelonephritis,
if it is left untreated, can lead to perm-
anent kidney damage,  septicaemia, and
septic shock.
The infection is diagnosed by the
examination of a urine  culture. Further
investigations using urography or ultra-
sound scanning may be necessary. Most
infections of the urinary tract are treated
with antibiotic drugs.
urination, excessive The production of
more than 2.5 litres of  urine per day.
The medical term is polyuria.
Causes include psychiatric problems,
which may cause a person to drink com-
pulsively; diabetes mellitus; disorders of
the kidney known as salt-losing states;
and central diabetes insipidus. Any per-
son who passes large quantities of
urine should consult a doctor.
urination, frequent Also known as uri-
nary ※frequency§, the passing of urine
more often than the average of 4每6
times daily. Causes of frequent urina-
tion include excessive production of
urine (see  urination, excessive),  cystitis,
anxiety, stones in the bladder (see  cal-
culus, urinary tract), enlargement of the
prostate gland (see  prostate, enlarged)
in men, and, rarely, a  bladder tumour.
Some people who are suffering from
kidney failure pass urine more frequent-
ly, especially during the night. Treatment
of frequent urination is always of the
underlying cause.
urination, painful Pain or discomfort
that occurs when urine is being passed.
Painful urination is known medically as
dysuria. The pain is often described 
as burning; sometimes it is preceded by
difficulty in starting urine flow. Pain
after the flow has ceased, with a strong
desire to continue, is called strangury. 
The most common cause, especially in
women, is cystitis. Other causes include
a bladder tumour, bladder stone (see cal-
culus, urinary tract), urethritis, balanitis,
prostatitis, vaginal  candidiasis (thrush),
or allergy to vaginal deodorants. Strang-
ury is usually caused by spasm of an
inflamed bladder wall, but it may be
due to bladder stones. Mild discomfort
whenpassing urine may be caused by
highly concentrated urine.
Dysuria may be investigated by phys-
ical examination, urinalysis, urography,
or  cystoscopy. (See also  urethral syn-
drome, acute.)
urine The pale yellow fluid produced by
the kidneys and excreted from the body
via the  ureters,  bladder, and  urethra.
Urine is produced when blood is filtered
through the  kidneys to remove waste
products and excess water or chemical
substances. The main component is urea.
A healthy adult produces between 0.5
and 2 litres of urine per day. The mini-
mum volume of urine needed to remove
all waste products is about 0.5 litres. A
high fluid intake increases the amount
of urine produced; high fluid loss from
sweating, vomiting, or diarrhoea leads
to reduced production.
urine, abnormal Urine may be pro-
duced in abnormal amounts or have an
abnormal appearance or composition.
Conditions of abnormal production of
urine include excessive production (see
urination, excessive), oliguria, and anuria.
Abnormal appearances of urine include
cloudiness (which may be caused by a
urinary tract infection, a calculus, or the
presence of salts);  haematuria; discol-
oration from certain foods or drugs; and
frothiness (which may be caused by an
excess of protein).
572
URINATION, EXCESSIVE URINE, ABNORMAL
Uthe patient has stress incontinence (see
incontinence, urinary).
urography See intravenous urography.
urology A branch of medicine concerned
with the structure, functioning, and dis-
orders of the urinary tract in males and
females, and of the reproductive system
in males. Investigative techniques that
are used in urology include urography,
cystoscopy,  ultrasoundscanning,  cysto-
metry, and urinalysis.
ursodeoxycholic acid A drug used to
dissolve gallstones. It is only suitable if
the stones are made exclusively of
cholesterol and if the gallbladder is
functioning normally. Side effects of the
drug are rare but can include diarrhoea,
indigestion, and a rash. Drug treatment
is less commonly used since the intro-
duction of minimally invasive surgery.
urticaria A skin condition, also known
as nettle rash or hives, that is character-
ized by the development of itchy weals,
usually on the limbs and trunk. Large
weals may merge to form irregular,
raised patches. 
Urticaria is generally harmless and usu-
ally lasts only a few hours. Sometimes a
persistent or recurrent form develops.
Dermographism is a less common form
Abnormal composition of the urine may
occur in diabetes mellitus, kidney failure,
and sometimes  glomerulonephritis and
nephrotic syndrome, as well as in other
kidney disorders such as Fanconi＊ssyn-
drome and renal tubular acidosis.
urine tests See urinalysis.
urodynamics A group of tests carried
out to investigate problems with bladder
control, such as  incontinence. Urodyna-
mic studies involve the insertion of
probes into the  urethra, bladder, and
rectum or  vagina in order to monitor
pressure changes while the bladder is
being filled and emptied. 
In X-ray monitoring, the patient stands
against an upright table while his or her
bladder is filled with a contrast medium
through a catheter and is then emptied
again. The shape and functioning of the
bladder, and the functioning of the ure-
thra, can then be viewed on an X-ray
monitor. At the same time, a continu-
ous recording of pressure changes within
the bladder is made on a paper trace.
As the bladder is being filled, the
patient is asked to cough. This action
increases the pressure in and around
the bladder, and if it causes leakage of
urine onto an electronic absorbent pad,
URODYNAMICS
573
URTICARIA URINE TESTS
U
X-ray table
X-ray machine
Catheter
to bladder
Rectum
Radiographer
Ureter Uterus
Probe 
in bladder
SITE OF PROBES
Urethra
Lead from
bladder probe
Lead from
vaginal probe
Lead from
electronic pad Pressure trace
X-RAY MONITORING
Solution
containing
contrast
medium
X-ray
monitor
Probe in
vagina
Monitor
controls574
of urticaria in which weals form after
the skin is stroked. Urticaria sometimes
occurs with angioedema. 
The cause of urticaria is often un-
known. The most common known cause
is an allergic reaction (see  allergy),
often to a particular food, food additive,
or drug. Urticaria may also be caused by
exposure to heat, cold, or sunlight. Less
commonly, it may be associated with
another disorder, such as vasculitis, sys-
temic lupus erythematosus, or cancer.
Itching can be relieved by applying
calamine lotion or by taking  antihis-
tamine drugs. More severe cases may
require  corticosteroid drugs. Identifying
and avoiding known trigger factors can
help prevent future reactions. A tend-
ency to urticaria often disappears in
time without treatment.
urticaria, neonatal A very common,
harmless skin condition, also known as
erythema neonatorum or toxic eryth-
ema, that affects newborn infants. A
blotchy rash, in which raised white or
yellow lumps are surrounded by ill-
defined red areas of inflammation,
forms, mainly affecting the face, chest,
arms, and thighs. The cause of neonatal
urticaria is unknown. The rash usually
clears up without treatment.
uterine muscle relaxants Drugs that
are used to delay the premature del-
ivery of a  fetus. Beta2-adrenoceptor
stimulants, such as  salbutamol, relax 
the muscle of the uterus and may post-
pone labour for days or weeks in at-risk
pregnancies of 24每33 weeks＊ gestation.
Delay of premature labour for up to 48
hours allows time for  corticosteroid
drugs to be given to the mother to help
the fetal lungs to mature.
uterovaginal prolapse See  uterus,
prolapse of.
uterus The hollow, muscular organ of
the female reproductive system in which
the fertilized  ovum (egg) normally be-
comes embedded and in which the
embryo and  fetus develop. The uterus 
is commonly known as the womb. It is
situated in the pelvic cavity, behind the
bladder and in front of the intestines.
In a nonpregnant woman, the uterus
is 7.5每10cm long and weighs 60每90g.
The lower part opens into the vagina at
the cervix; the upper part opens into the
fallopian tubes. The inside is lined with
endometrium. The uterus expands in size
during pregnancy to accommodate the
growing baby. At full-term, the powerful
uterine muscles expel the baby via the
birth canal (see  childbirth). After the
menopause, the endometrium atrophies
(becomes thinner) and the uterine mus-
cle and connective tissue are reduced.
Conditions that affect the uterus include
congenital disorders, such as malform-
ation or absence of the uterus; tumours,
including  polyps,  fibroids, and cancer 
of the endometrium (see uterus, cancer
of); infections, causing endometritis; and
hormonal disorders. (See also  uterus,
prolapse of; uterus, retroverted.)
uterus, cancer of A malignant growth
in the tissues of the  uterus. Cancer of
the uterus mainly affects the cervix (see
cervix, cancer of) and  endometrium. In
rare cases, the uterine muscle is affected
by a type of cancer called a leiomyosar-
coma. The term uterine cancer usually
refers to cancer of the endometrium.
Risk factors for endometrial cancer
include anything that may raise oestro-
gen levels in the body, such as obesity, a
history of failure to ovulate, or taking
oestrogen hormones  long term if these
are not balanced with progestogen drugs.
It is also more common in women who
have had few or no children.
Before the menopause, the first symp-
tom of cancer of the uterus may be
menorrhagia or bleeding between per-
iods or after sexual intercourse; after
URTICARIA, NEONATALUTERUS, CANCER OF
U
UTERUS
Uterus
Vagina
Bladder
Cervix
Ovary Fallopian tube575
the menopause, it is usually a blood-
stained vaginal discharge. Diagnosis is
made by hysteroscopy or biopsy.
Very early endometrial cancer is usu-
ally treated by hysterectomy and removal
of the fallopian tubes and ovaries. If the
cancer has spread, radiotherapy and anti-
cancer drug treatment may also be used.
uterus, prolapse of A condition in which
the  uterus descends from its normal
position into the  vagina. The degreeof
prolapse varies from 1st-degree prolapse,
in which there is only slight displacement
of the uterus, to 3rd-degreeprolapse
(procidentia), in which the uterus can be
seen outside the vulva.
Stretching of the ligaments supporting
the uterus (during  childbirth, for exam-
ple) is the most common cause. Prolapse
is aggravated by obesity.
There are often no symptoms, but
sometimes there is a dragging feeling 
in the pelvis. Diagnosis is made by
physical examination. 
Pelvic floor exercises strengthen the
muscles of the vagina and thus reduce
the risk of a prolapse, especially follow-
ing childbirth. Treatment usually involves
surgery (hysterectomy).Rarely, if surgery
is not wanted or is not recommended, a
plastic ring-shaped pessary may be
inserted into the vagina to hold the
uterus in position. (See also  cystocele;
rectocele; urethrocele.)
uterus, retroverted A normal variation
in which the uterus inclines backwards
rather than forwards. A retroverted uterus
rarely causes problems unless it is com-
bined with a pelvic infection.
uvea Part of the eye, comprising the iris,
the  ciliary body and its muscle that
focuses the lens, and the choroid.
uveitis Inflammation of the uvea, which
may seriously affect vision. Uveitis may
affect any part of the uvea, including the
iris (when it is called iritis), the 0 (when
it is known as cyclitis), or  the  choroid
(when it is called choroiditis). The most
common cause is an autoimmune disor-
der. Other causes include infections
such as  tuberculosis and syphilis. Treat-
ment is with  corticosteroid drugs and
eye-drops containing an  atropine-relat-
ed substance. The inflammation is
monitored with a  slit-lamp. Various
other drugs may be prescribed if the
cause is an infection.
uvula The small, fleshy protuberance
that hangs from the middle of the lower
edge of the soft palate. 
UVULA UTERUS, PROLAPSE OF
U
UTERUS, RETROVERTED
Bladder Retroverted
uterus
Usual position
of uterus576
vaccination A form of  immunization in
which killed or weakened  microorg-
anisms, or inactivated bacterial  toxins,
are introduced into the body, usually by
injection, to sensitize the  immune sys-
tem  (see  vaccine). If disease-causing
organisms or toxins of the same type
later enter the body, the sensitized
immune system rapidly produces  anti-
bodies that destroy them.
vaccine A preparation given to induce
immunity against an infectious disease.
Most vaccines contain the organisms
(or parts of the organisms) against
which protection is sought.
Vaccines are usually given by injection
into the upper arm, but some, such as
the  poliomyelitis vaccine, may be given
orally. Some vaccines require several
doses, spaced some weeks apart; others
require only 1 dose.
vacuum extraction An obstetric pro-
cedure to facilitate the delivery of a
baby. It may be used if the second stage
of labour (see  childbirth) is prolonged, 
if the mother becomes exhausted, or if
the baby shows signs of  fetal distress.
Vacuum suction techniques are also
used to perform early abortions.
The vacuum extraction instrument
consists of a suction cup connected to 
a vacuum bottle. The suction cup is
placed on the baby＊s head in the birth
canal, and the vacuum machine sucks
the baby＊s scalp into the cup. The ob-
stetrician draws the baby out of the
mother＊s vagina by gently pulling on the
cup with each uterine contraction.
The baby is born with a swelling on
the scalp, but this disappears after a
few days, usually without treatment.
vagina The muscular passage, forming
part of the female  reproductive system,
between the  cervix and the external
genitalia. The vagina has muscular
walls, which are highly elastic to allow
sexual intercourse and childbirth and are
richly supplied with blood vessels.
vaginal bleeding Bleeding, via the vagi-
na,that may come from the uterus, the
cervix, or from the vagina itself. 
The most common source of bleeding
is the uterus and the most likely reason
for it is menstruation. From puberty to
the menopause, menstrual bleeding
usually occurs at regular intervals. How-
ever, problems may occur with either
the character or the timing of the bleed-
ing (see menstruation, disorders of).
Nonmenstrual bleeding from the uterus
may be due to a variety of causes. Hor-
monal drugs, such as oral contraceptives,
can cause spotting. Other possible causes
include  endometritis, endometrial can-
cer (see uterus, cancer of), and  fibroids.
In early pregnancy, bleeding may be a
sign of threatened miscarriage. Later in
pregnancy, it may indicate  placenta
praevia or placental abruption (see
antepartum haemorrhage).
Bleeding from the cervix may be due
to cervical erosion, in which case it may
occur after intercourse.  Cervicitis  and
polyps may also cause bleeding. More
seriously, bleeding may be a sign of cer-
vical cancer (see cervix, cancer of).
A possible cause of bleeding from the
vagina is injury during intercourse,
especially following the menopause,
when the walls of the vagina become
thinner and more fragile. Occasionally,
severe vaginitis causes bleeding. Rarely,
vaginal bleeding is caused by cancer 
of the vagina.
vaginal discharge The emission of se-
cretions from the vagina. Some mucous
secretion from the vaginal walls and
from the cervix is normal in the repro-
ductive years; its amount and nature
vary from woman to woman and at dif-
ferent times in the menstrual cycle (see
menstruation).  Oral contraceptives can
increase or decrease the discharge.
Secretions tend to be greater during
pregnancy. Sexual stimulation also pro-
duces increased vaginal discharge.
Discharge may be abnormal if it is
excessive, offensive-smelling, yellow or
green, or if it causes itching. Abnormal
discharge often accompanies  vaginitis,
and may be the result of infection, as in
VACCINATION VAGINAL DISCHARGE
V
Vvalgus The medical term for outward
displacement of a part of the body.
valproate See sodium valproate.
Valsalva＊s manoeuvre A forcible at-
tempt to breathe out when the airway is
closed. The manoeuvre occurs naturally
when an attempt is made to breathe out
while holding the  vocal cords tightly
together. This happens, for example, at
the beginning of a sneeze. When per-
formed deliberately by pinching the
nose and holding the mouth closed, the
manoeuvre can prevent pressure dam-
age to the eardrums (see barotrauma).
valve A structure that allows fluid or
semi-fluid material to flow in 1 direc-
tion through a tube or passageway but
closes to prevent reflux in the opposite
direction. The valves at the exits from
the heart chambers and in the veins are
essential to the circulatory system. There
are also small valves in the vessels of
the lymphatic system. 
valve replacement A surgical operation
to replace a defective or diseased heart
valve. (See also heart-valve surgery.)
valvotomy An operation that is per-
formed to correct a narrowed  heart
valve. Cuts are made, or pressure is
applied, to separate the flaps of the
valve where they have joined, thereby
reducing the degree of narrowing. Valvo-
tomy is performed either by opening the
heart up (see heart-valve surgery) or by
balloon valvuloplasty. 
valvular heart disease A defect of 1
or more of the heart valves.
valvuloplasty Reconstructive or repair
surgery on a defective heart valve (see
heart-valve surgery). Valvuloplasty may
VALVE
candidiasis or  trichomoniasis, or may be
due to a foreign body, such as a forgot-
ten tampon, in the vagina. 
vaginal itching Irritation in the vagina,
often associated with  vulval itching. In
many cases, it is a symptom of vaginitis,
which may be caused by infection or an
allergic reaction to hygiene or spermici-
dal products. Vaginal itching is common
after the menopause, when it is caused
by low oestrogen levels. Depending on
the cause, treatment may be with  anti-
biotic drugs or hormones.
vaginal repair An operation to correct
prolapse of the vaginal wall. This may
be accompanied by a vaginal hysterec-
tomy if the uterus is also prolapsed (see
uterus, prolapse of). 
vaginismus Painful, involuntary spasm of
the muscles surrounding the entrance
to the  vagina, interfering with  sexual
intercourse and sometimes also medical
vaginal examinations. (See also  inter-
course, painful; psychosexual dysfunction.)
vaginitis Inflammation of the  vagina
that may be caused by infection, com-
monly by the fungus  CANDIDA ALBICANS
(see  candidiasis), the parasite  TRICHO-
MONAS VAGINALIS (see trichomoniasis), or
bacteria. After the menopause the vagi-
nal lining becomes fragile and prone to
inflammation. This is called atrophic
vaginitis and is due to a reduction in
the production of oestrogen hormones. 
Infections are treated with  antibiotics
or  antifungal drugs. In cases of allergy,
irritants should be avoided. Any foreign
body is removed. Atrophic vaginitis is
treated with oestrogen drugs. (See also
vulvitis; vulvovaginitis.)
vagotomy An operation in which the
vagus nerve, which controls production
of digestive acid by the stomach wall, is
cut. Once widely used to treat some
cases of peptic ulcer, it has now largely
been replaced by drug treatment.
vagus nerve The 10th cranial nerve and
principal component of the parasympa-
thetic division of the autonomic nervous
system. The vagus nerve passes from
the medulla oblongata (in the brainstem)
through the neck and chest to the abdo-
men, and has branches  to mostmajor
organs, including the larynx, pharynx, tra-
chea, lungs, heart, and digestive system.
577
VALVULOPLASTY VAGINAL ITCHING
V
Valve
cusp
(flap)
Blood 
at high
pressure
opens
valve
Blood at low
pressure
Blood at high pressure
closes valve
Valve 
cusp
Low-
pressure
blood
OPEN VALVE CLOSED VALVE578
be performed as  open heart surgery.
However, the technique of balloon
valvuloplasty makes it possible to treat
a narrowed valve without opening the
chest. A  balloon catheter is passed
through the skin into a blood vessel
and from there to the heart. Inflation of
the balloon via the catheter then sepa-
rates the flaps of a narrowed valve.
vaporizer A device for converting a
drug or water into a fine spray so that
medication can be taken by inhalation
or so that inhaled air can be moistened. 
variant angina A form of  angina that
causes chest pain at rest, often during
sleep. The pain may occur with breath-
lessness and  palpitations. The cause is
thought to be narrowing of the coronary
arteries by muscular spasm in their
walls. Treatment with  calcium channel
blockers or nitrates is usually effective.
varicella Another name for chickenpox.
varicella每zoster The virus that causes
chickenpox and shingles.
varices Enlarged, tortuous, or twisted
sections of vessels, usually veins. Varices
is the plural of varix. A vein affected by
varices is called a varicose vein. 
varicocele Varicose veins surrounding a
testis. Varicocele is a common condi-
tion. It almost exclusively affects the left
testis and is usually harmless, although
there may be aching in the  scrotum or
an abnormally low sperm count (see
infertility). Aching may be relieved by
supportive underwear. Surgery to divide
and tie off the swollen veins may be
performed if the sperm count is low. 
varicose veins Enlarged, tortuous veins
just beneath the skin. Varicose veins
most often occur in the legs but can
also occur in the anus (see  haemor-
rhoids), oesophagus (see oesophageal
varices),and scrotum (see varicocele).
A defect of the valves in the leg veins
causes blood to pool in the veins near
the surface of the skin, causing them to
become varicose. Contributing factors
include obesity, hormonal changes and
pressure on the pelvic veins during
pregnancy, hormonal changes occurring
at the menopause, and standing for long
periods of time. Varicose veins are com-
mon, tend to run in families, and affect
more women than men. 
Varicose veins may not cause any prob-
lems but may ache  severely;  swollen
feet and ankles and persistent itching
may occur. These symptoms may wors-
en during the day and can be relieved
only by sitting with the legs raised. In
women, symptoms are often worse just
before menstruation. In severe cases,
leg ulcers may occur.  Thrombophlebitis
may be associated with varicose veins.
Usually, support stockings, regular walk-
ing, and sitting with the feet up as
much as possible are the only measures
required. In more severe cases,  scle-
rotherapy may be carried out. Varicose
veins may require surgical removal if
they become  painful or ulcerated, but
they may later develop elsewhere.
variola Another name for smallpox.
varus The medical term for an inward
displacement of part of the body.
vascular Relating to the blood vessels
(see circulatory system).
vasculitis Inflammation of blood ves-
sels. Vasculitis usually leads to damage
to the lining of vessels, with narrowing
or blockage, that restricts or stops
blood flow. As a result, the body tissues
supplied by the affected vessels are
damaged or destroyed by ischaemia.
Vasculitis is thought to be caused in
most cases by the presence of minute
bodies, called immune complexes, in the
circulating blood. Immune complexes
(consisting of  antigens bound to  anti-
bodies) are normally destroyed by white
blood cells, but sometimes adhere to
the walls of blood vessels, where they
cause inflammation. In some cases, the
antigens are  viruses. Vasculitis is the
basic disease process  in a number of
disorders, including polyarteritis nodosa,
erythema nodosum,  Henoch每Sch?nlein
purpura, serum sickness, temporal arter-
itis, and Buerger＊s disease.
vas deferens Either of a pair of tubes
that convey sperm from each  testis and
epididymis to the  urethra. The plural
form is vasa deferentia.
vasectomy The operation of male ster-
ilization. Vasectomy is a minor surgical
procedure, performed under local
anaesthetic (see anaesthesia, local), that
consists of cutting out a short length of
each vas deferens. After vasectomy, the
VAPORIZER VASECTOMY
Vman continues to achieve orgasm and
ejaculate as normal, but the  semen no
longer contains  sperm, which are reab-
sorbed in the testes. Male sterilization
is a safe and effective method of contra-
ception. However, rarely, the severed
ends of a vas deferens reunite, and
sperm appear in the ejaculate. If this
occurs, the man can safely undergo
another vasectomy. Some operations to
restore fertility after vasectomy are suc-
cessful, but the process should be
regarded as irreversible.
vasoconstriction Narrowing of blood
vessels,causing reduced blood flow to a
partof the body. Vasoconstriction under
the skin occurs in response to the cold
and reduces heat loss from the body. 
vasodilation Widening of blood ves-
sels, causing increased blood flow to a
part of the body. Vasodilation under the
skin occurs in response to hot weather
and increases heat loss from the body. 
vasodilator drugs A group of drugs
that widen blood vessels. Vasodilator
drugs include  ACE inhibitors,  alpha-
blockers, calcium channel blockers, nitrate
drugs, and sympatholytic drugs. They
are used to treat disorders in which
abnormal narrowing of blood vessels
reduces blood flow through tissues,
impairing the supply of oxygen. Such
disorders include  angina pectoris and
peripheral vascular disease. Vasodilators
are also used to treat hypertension and
heart failure. All vasodilator drugs may
cause flushing, headaches, dizziness,
fainting, and swollen ankles. 
vasopressin Another name for ADH.
vasovagal attack Temporary loss of
consciousness due to sudden slowing
of the heartbeat, usually brought on by
severe pain, stress, shock, or fear. A
vasovagal attack, a common cause of
fainting in healthy people, results from
overstimulation of the vagus nerve. 
VD The abbreviation for venereal dis-
ease, an outdated term for  sexually
transmitted infections.
vector An animal that transmits a par-
ticular  infectious disease. A vector picks
up disease-causing organisms from a
source of infection (such as an infected
person＊s or animal＊s blood or faeces),
carries them in or on its body, and later
deposits them where they infect a new
host, directly or indirectly. Mosquitoes,
fleas, lice, ticks, and flies are the most
important vectors of disease to humans.
veganism The adoption of a diet that
excludes all meat and fish and all ani-
mal products, including milk and eggs.
A vegan diet is likely to result in vitamin
B12 deficiency. Supplements are essen-
tial during pregnancy.
vegetarianism Eating a diet that ex-
cludes meat and fish, and sometimes
all other animal products. Humans do
not need to eat meat or animal prod-
ucts to maintain health as long as the
nutrients supplied by plant foods pro-
vide a balanced diet (see  nutrition).
However, people who exclude all animal
products (vegans) need to plan their
diet carefully or take supplements to
avoid vitamin B12 or calcium deficiency. 
Vegetarian diets are relatively rich in
fibre, which may help protect against
VASECTOMY
579
VEGETARIANISM VASOCONSTRICTION
V
Bladder
SITES OF 
INCISIONS
Vas
deferens
Area to be
removed
Penis
Testis
Bladder
Penis
Testis
BEFORE THE PROCEDURE AFTER THE PROCEDURE
Vas
deferens
Secured
endsdiverticular disease and cancer of the
intestine (see  colon, cancer of;  rectum,
cancer of). Vegetarian diets are low in
fats, especially saturated fats (which may
contribute to  coronary artery disease
and possibly some forms of cancer).
These diets are also likely to contain
less  sodium and more  potassium, and
vegetarians tend to have lower blood
pressure than people who eat meat.
vegetative state A term that is some-
times used to describe a type of
indefinite deep  coma. Although the
eyes may be open and occasional ran-
dom movements of the head and limbs
may occur, there are no other signs of
consciousness, and there is no respon-
siveness to stimuli. Only the basic
functions, such as breathing and heart-
beat, are maintained.
vein A vessel that returns blood towards
the  heart from the various organs and
tissues of the body. The walls of veins,
like those of arteries, consist of a
smooth inner lining, a muscular middle
layer, and a fibrous outer covering.
However, blood pressure in veins is
lower than in arteries, and the walls of
veins are thinner, less elastic, less mus-
cular, and weaker than those of arteries.
The linings of many veins contain folds,
which act as valves, ensuring that blood
flows only towards the heart. Blood is
helped on its way through the veins by
pressure on the vessel walls from the
contraction of surrounding muscles.
(See also circulatory system.)
veins, disorders of Common disorders
affecting  veins include  varicose veins,
deep vein thrombosis (see  thrombosis,
deep vein), and thrombophlebitis.
vena cava Either of 2 large  veins into
which all circulating (deoxygenated) blood
drains. The venae cavae (superior and
inferior) deliver blood to the right atrium
of the heart for pumping to the lungs. 
The superior vena cava starts at the top
of the chest, close to the sternum, and
passes down through the  pericardium
before connecting to the right atrium. It
collects blood from the upper trunk,
head, neck, and arms. The inferior vena
cava starts in the lower abdomen and
travels upwards in front of the spine,
behind the liver, and through the  dia-
phragm before joining the right atrium.
It collects blood from the  legs, pelvic
organs, liver, and kidneys.
venepuncture A common procedure in
which a vein, usually in the forearm, is
pierced with a needle to inject fluid or
withdraw blood. A tourniquet is used to
swell the veins, and a sterile needle is
inserted. A syringe is attached to the
needle if blood is to be taken or medica-
tion injected. For  intravenous infusion, a
cannula (tube) is inserted via the needle.
After the fluid has been injected or
withdrawn, the needle or cannula is
removed. The area is then covered and
580
VEGETATIVE STATE VENEPUNCTURE
V
VEIN
Outer layer
Inner lining
Valve flap
Muscle layer
STRUCTURE OF A VEIN
Carotid artery
Subclavian
artery
Subclavian
vein
Aorta
Jugular vein
VENA CAVA
Inferior
vena cava
Superior
vena cava
Heartpressure applied to stop any bleeding.
The procedure is not usually painful but
may cause some discomfort.
venereal diseases See  sexually trans-
mitted infections.
venereology The medical discipline
concerned with the study and treatment
of sexually transmitted infections.
venesection The process of withdrawing
blood from a vein for blood donation or
therapeutic bloodletting. Regular blood-
letting is performed in the treatment of
polycythaemia and haemochromatosis.
venlafaxine A serotonin and noradren-
aline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) drug
used in the treatment of  depression.
Venlafaxine combines the effects of sel-
ective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and
tricyclic antidepressants to produce fewer
side effects than other types of anti-
depressant. Side effects may include
nausea, dry mouth, and constipation.
venography A diagnostic procedure that
enables  veins to be seen on an  X-ray
film after they have been injected with a
substance opaque to X-rays. It is used
to detect  abnormalities or diseases of
the veins, such as narrowing or blockage
from thrombosis. 
venomous bites and stings The injec-
tion of venom by certain animals via
their mouthparts (bites) or other inject-
ing apparatus (stings). Venoms are often
carried to discourage predators, and are
sometimes used to kill or immobilize
prey. It is rare for a venomous animal to
attack a person unless it has been pro-
voked or disturbed. Specific antivenoms
are available to  treat many, though not
all, types of animal venom. (See also
insect stings;  jellyfish stings;  scorpion
stings; snake bites; spider bites.) 
ventilation The use of a machine called a
ventilator to take over or assist breathing.
Arrested or severely impaired breathing
may be due to  head injury, brain dis-
ease, an overdose of opioid drugs, chest
injury, respiratory disease, a nerve or
muscle disorder, or major chest or ab-
dominal surgery. Ventilation may be
needed if a muscle relaxant has been
given during an operation as part of
general  anaesthesia. Premature babies
with  respiratory distress syndrome may
also need ventilation for a period until
their lungs develop sufficiently. Positive
pressure ventilation (continuous pump-
ing of air under high pressure) may be
used in the home in the treatment 
of sleep apnoea.
ventilator A device used for the artifi-
cial  ventilation of a person who is
unable to breathe naturally. A ventilator
is an electrical pump connected to an
air supply that works like bellows. Air is
directed through a tube passed down
the windpipe to inflate the lungs. The air
is then expelled by the natural elasticity
of the lungs and ribcage. A valve on the
ventilator prevents the expelled air from
re-entering the lungs.
ventilatory failure A life-threatening
condition in which the amount of car-
bon dioxide in the blood rises, and the
amount of oxygen falls, due to disrup-
tion of the normal exchange of gases
581
VENTILATORY FAILURE VENEREAL DISEASES
V
VENEPUNCTURE
Skin
INSIDE THE VEIN
Fatty
tissue
Wall of vein
Needle
Vein
Muscle
Tourniquet
Syringeis small and closes without treatment.
Surgery may be performed for larger
defects, usually with good results.
ventricular tachycardia A serious car-
diac arrhythmia in which each heartbeat
is initiated from electrical activity in the
ventricles rather than from the sinoatrial
node in the right atrium. It is caused by
an abnormally fast heart-rate due to
serious heart disease, such as myocar-
dial infarction or cardiomyopathy. It may
last for a few seconds or for several
days. Diagnosis is confirmed by  ECG.
Emergency treatment is with  defibril-
lation and an antiarrhythmic drug.
verapamil A drug that acts as a calcium
channel blocker  to treat  hypertension,
angina pectoris, and certain arrhythmias.
Possible side effects include headache,
flushing, dizziness, and ankle swelling.
vernix The white, cheese-like substance
covering a newborn baby. Vernix com-
prises fatty secretions and dead cells. It
protects the skin, insulates against heat
loss before birth, and lubricates the
baby＊s passage down the birth canal.
verruca The Latin name for a wart, com-
monly applied to warts on the soles.
version A change in the direction in
which a fetus lies so that a malpresenta-
tion, most often a breech (bottom-down)
presentation, replaces the normal head-
down presentation.
vertebra Any of the 33 approximately
cylindrical bones that form the  spine.
There are 7 vertebrae in the cervical
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT
582
between the air in the lungs and the
blood. Ventilatory failure may be due to
brain damage or to depression of the
respiratory centres by excessive doses of
drugs such as morphine. Treatment may
involve artificial  ventilation or, in some
cases, the use of respiratory stimulant
drugs. (See also respiratory failure.)
ventouse See vacuum extraction.
ventral Relating to the front of the
body, or describing the lowermost part
of a body structure when a person is
lying face-down. The opposite is dorsal.
ventricle A cavity or chamber. Both the
heart and  brain have anatomical parts
known as ventricles.
The brain has 4 ventricles: 1 in each of
the 2 cerebral hemispheres; a 3rd at the
centre of the brain, above the brain-
stem; and a 4th between the brainstem
and cerebellum. These cavities are filled
with cerebrospinal fluid.
The ventricles of the heart are its 2
lower chambers, which receive blood
from each  atrium and pump it to the
lungs and to the rest of the body.
ventricular ectopic beat A type of
cardiac  arrhythmia in which abnormal
heartbeats are initiated from electrical
impulses in the  ventricles of the  heart.
In a normal heart, beats are initiated by
the sinoatrial node in the right atrium.
Ventricular ectopic beats may be de-
tected on an ECG. If there are frequent
abnormal beats that cause symptoms,
or beats that arise from more than 1
site in the ventricles, treatment with an
antiarrhythmic drug may be required.
ventricular fibrillation One of the 2
life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias that
occur in  cardiac arrest. The  heart has
rapid, uncoordinated, ineffective con-
tractions and does not pump blood. The
problem is due to abnormal heartbeats
initiated by electrical activity in the ven-
tricles. It is a common complication of
myocardial infarction and may also be
caused by electrocution or drowning. 
The diagnosis is confirmed by  ECG.
Emergency treatment is with  defibrilla-
tion and antiarrhythmic drugs.
ventricular septal defect The medical
term meaning a hole between the lower
2 chambers of the heart. The abnormality
is present from birth and in many cases
VENTOUSE VERTEBRA
V
Ventricular septal
defect
Right
ventricle
of heart
Septum
Left
ventricle
of heartspine; 12 vertebrae in the thoracic spine;
5 vertebrae in the lumbar spine; 5 fused
vertebrae in the sacrum; and 4 fused ver-
tebrae in the coccyx. The top 24 vertebrae
are separated by discs of cartilage (see
disc, intervertebral). Each vertebra has a
hole in the centre through which the
spinal cord runs, and processes to
which muscles are attached.
vertebrobasilar insufficiency Inter-
mittent episodes of dizziness, double
vision, weakness, and difficulty in speak-
ing caused by reduced blood flow to
parts of the brain. It is usually due to ath-
erosclerosis of the basilar and vertebral
arteries and other arteries in the base of
the brain. Vertebrobasilar insufficiency
sometimes precedes a stroke.
vertigo An illusion that one or one＊s
surroundings are spinning. Vertigo is
due to a disturbance of the semicircular
canals in the inner ear or the nerve
tracts leading from them. Sudden-onset
vertigo is treated with rest and  antihis-
tamine drugs, which, in some cases, are
also given to prevent recurrent attacks.
VERTEBRA vesicle A small blister, usually filled with
clear fluid, that forms at a site of skin
damage. The term is also used to refer to
any small sac-like structure in the body.
vestibule A chamber. The vestibule in
the inner ear is a hollow chamber that
connects the 3 semicircular canals.
vestibulitis Inflammation of the nasal
vestibule (the part of the nasal cavity
just inside the nostril), usually as a
result of bacterial infection.
vestibulocochlear nerve The 8th cran-
ialnerve. It consists of 2 branches: the
vestibular nerve (concerned with balance)
and the cochlear nerve (concerned with
hearing). Each vestibulocochlear nerve
(1 on each side) carries sensory im-
pulses from the inner  ear to the brain,
which it enters between the pons and
medulla oblongata (in the brainstem). 
A tumour of the cells that surround
the vestibulocochlear nerve (see acous-
tic neuroma) may cause loss of balance,
tinnitus, and  deafness. Deafness may
also result from damage to the nerve,
which may be due to an infection, such
as  meningitis or  encephalitis, or to a
reaction to a drug such as streptomycin.
viability The capability of independent
survival and development. 
villus A minute finger-like projection from
a membranous surface. Millions of villi
are present on the mucous lining of the
small intestine. Each intestinal villus con-
tains a small lymph vessel and a network
583
VILLUS VERTEBROBASILAR INSUFFICIENCY
V
Capillary network
Villus
Vein
VILLI OF SMALL INTESTINE
Lymph vessel
Artery
VILLUS
Mucus-
producing cell
Cervical
vertebrae
Thoracic
vertebrae
Lumbar
vertebrae
Sacrum
Coccyx
LUMBAR VERTEBRA
THORACIC VERTEBRA
CERVICAL VERTEBRA
SPINE584
of capillaries. Its surface is covered with
hundreds of hairlike structures (micro-
villi). The villi and microvilli provide a
large surface area for absorption of food
molecules from the intestine into the
blood and the lymphatic system.
vinca alkaloids A group of substances
derived from the periwinkle plant (VINCA
ROSEA) that are used to treat leukaemias,
lymphomas, and some solid tumours,
such as  breast cancer and  lung cancer.
All vinca alkaloids can cause neurological
toxicity, which appears as  neuropathy.
Other side effects may include abdomi-
nal pain, constipation, and reversible
alopecia. Common vinca alkaloids are
vinblastine, vindesine, and vincristine.
Vincent＊s disease A severe form of
gingivitis in which bacterial infection
causes painful ulceration of the gums.
(See also gingivitis, acute ulcerative.) 
vincristine A vinca alkaloid used to treat
certain cancers. One particular side effect
of vincristine is peripheral or autonomic
neuropathy; but, unlike the other vinca
alkaloids, it causes very little reduction
in blood-cell production by the bone
marrow. Other side effects may include
abdominal pain, constipation, and re-
versible alopecia.
viraemia The presence of virus particles
in the blood. Viraemia can occur at cer-
tain stages in a variety of viral infections.
Some viruses, such as those responsi-
ble for viral  hepatitis,  yellow fever, and
poliomyelitis, are transported in the
bloodstream. Others, such as the rubella
virus and HIV, multiply in, and spread
via, certain white blood cells. If viraemia
is a feature of a viral infection, there is a
risk that the infection may be transmitted
to other people in blood or blood prod-
ucts, or by insects that feed on blood.
viral haemorrhagic fever Diseases
that are prevalent in Africa and cause
severe bleeding. There are several types,
including Ebola fever, Lassa fever, Han-
tavirus, and Marburg fever. The diseases
are fatal in a large percentage of cases,
but Lassa fever may respond to antiviral
drugs if given in the 1st week.
virginity The physical state of not hav-
ing experienced sexual intercourse.
virilism The presence in a woman of
masculine characteristics. Virilism is
caused by excessive levels of androgen
hormones. Androgens are male sex hor-
mones which, in women, are normally
secreted in small amounts by the
adrenal glands and ovaries. Raised levels
induce various changes in women, in-
cluding hirsutism; male-pattern baldness;
disruption or cessation of menstruation;
enlargement of the clitoris; loss of nor-
mal fat deposits around the hips;
development of the arm and shoulder
muscles; and deepening of the voice. 
virility A term used to describe the
quality of maleness, especially in sexual
characteristics and performance.
virilization The development in a woman
of male characteristics as a result of
overproduction of  androgen hormones
by the adrenal glands and/or ovaries.
This may be due to various conditions
such as certain  adrenal tumours, poly-
cystic ovary (see  ovary, polycystic) and
some other ovarian cysts, or congenital
adrenal hyperplasia.
virion A single, complete, virus particle. 
virology The study of  viruses and the
epidemiology and treatment of diseases
caused by viruses. In a more restricted
sense, virology also refers to the isola-
tion and identification of viruses to
diagnose specific viral infections. Depend-
ingon the type of virus, this may involve
growing viruses in cultures of human or
animal cells,  staining or microscopic
examination of specimens containing
viruses, or immunoassay techniques. 
virulence The ability of a microorganism
to cause disease. This can be assessed
by measuring what proportion of the
population exposed to the microorgan-
ism develops symptoms of disease, how
rapidly the infection spreads through the
body, or the mortality from the infection.
viruses The smallest known types of
infectious agent. It is debatable whether
viruses are truly living organisms or just
collections of molecules capable of self-
replication under specific conditions.
Their sole activity is to invade the cells
of other organisms, which they then
take over to make copies of themselves.
Outside living cells, viruses are inert. 
A single virus particle (virion) consists
of an inner core of  nucleic acid, which
may be either DNA or RNA, surrounded
VINCA ALKALOIDS VIRUSES
Vby 1 or 2 protective protein shells (cap-
sids). Surrounding the outer capsid may
be another layer, the viral envelope,
which consists mainly of protein. The
nucleic acid consists of a string of genes
that contain coded instructions for
making copies of the virus. 
Common viral diseases include the
common cold, influenza, and chickenpox
(caused by the varicella每zoster virus).
AIDS is caused by the human immuno-
deficiency virus (HIV).
viscera A collective term used to
describe the internal organs.
viscosity The resistance to flow of a fluid;
its ※stickiness§. The viscosity of blood
affects its ability to flow through small
vessels. An increase in the viscosity of
blood increases the risk of thrombosis.
vision The faculty of sight. When light-
rays reach the eye, most of the focusing
is done by the cornea, but the eye also
has an automatic fine-focusing  facility,
accommodation, that operates by altering
the curvature of the lens. Together , these
systems form an image on the  retina.
The light-sensitive rod and cone cells in
the retina convert the elements of this
image into nerve impulses that pass
into the visual cortex of the  brain via
the  optic nerves. The rods, which are
more concentrated at the periphery of
the retina, are highly sensitive to light
but not to colour. The colour-sensitive
585
cones are concentrated more at the
centre of the retina (see colour vision).
The brain coordinates the motor nerve
impulses to the 6 tiny muscles that
move each eye to achieve alignment of
the eyes. Accurate alignment allows the
brain to fuse the images from each eye,
but because each eye has a slightly dif-
ferent view of a given object, the brain
obtains information that is interpreted
as solidity or depth. This stereoscopic
vision is important in judging distance.
vision, disorders of The most com-
mon visual disorders are refractive
errors, such as myopia,  hypermetropia,
and  astigmatism, which can almost
always be corrected by  glasses or  con-
tact lenses. Other disorders include
amblyopia; double vision; and disorders
of the  eye or  optic nerve, of the nerve
pathways connecting the optic nerves
to the brain, and of the brain itself.
The eye may lose its transparency
through corneal opacities,  cataract, or
vitreous haemorrhage. Defects near the
centre of the retina cause loss of the
corresponding parts of the  visual field
(see  macular degeneration).  Floaters,
which are usually insignificant, may in-
dicate a retinal tear or haemorrhage, or
they may herald a  retinal detachment.
Optic neuritis can cause a blind spot in
the centre of the visual field. 
Damage to the brain (for example, from
a  stroke) may cause visual impairment
such as hemianopia, agnosia, visual pers-
everation (in which a scene continues
to be perceived after the direction of gaze
has shifted), and visual hallucinations.
vision, loss of Inability to see. This may
develop slowly or suddenly and may be
temporary or permanent, depending on
the cause. Vision loss may affect 1 or
both eyes. It can cause complete blind-
ness or may affect only peripheral, or
only central, vision. 
Progressive loss of visual clarity is
common with advancing age and may
be due to a number of disorders (see
vision, disorders of).
Sudden loss of vision may be caused
by disorders such as hyphaema, severe
uveitis, vitreous haemorrhage, or  retinal
haemorrhage.  Optic neuritis can reduce
vision in 1  eye. Damage to the nerve 
VISION, LOSS OF VISCERA
V
Surface
protein
Protein shell
Nucleic acid
(genetic material)
VIRUSES
Viral
envelope
STRUCTURE OF A VIRUSconnections between the eyes and brain,
or to the visual area of the brain, can
cause loss of peripheral vision and may
be a result of  embolism,  ischaemia,
tumour, inflammation, or injury.
vision tests The part of an eye examina-
tion that determines whether there is
any reduction in the ability to see. Most
vision tests (for example the  Snellen
chart) are tests of visual acuity. 
In this type of test, a device called a
phoropter is used to hold different lenses
in front of each eye. The lenses in the
phoropter are changed until the letters
near the bottom of the Snellen chart can
be read. Tests of visual field may also be
performed to assess disorders of the
eye and the nervous system. Refraction
tests can detect hypermetropia, myopia,
or  astigmatism; the effect of lenses on
movements of light reflected from the
eye is observed to calculate the correc-
tive glasses or  contact lenses needed. If
presbyopia is suspected, close-reading
tests are used to assess accommodation.
visual acuity Sharpness of central vision.
Refractive errors, such as myopia, hyper-
metropia and astigmatism, are the most
common causes of poor visual acuity.
Poor visual acuity for near objects occurs
in presbyopia.
visual field The total area in which visual
perception is possible while a person is
looking straight ahead. The visual fields
VISION TESTS
normally extend outwards over an angle
of about 90 degrees on either side of
the midline of the face, but are more re-
stricted above and below, especially if
the eyes are deep-set or the eyebrows
are prominent. The visual fields of the 2
eyes overlap to a large extent, giving
binocular vision. Partial loss of the visual
field may occur in glaucoma or stroke. 
vital sign An indication that a person is
still alive. Vital signs include chest
movements caused by breathing, the
presence of a pulse, and the constric-
tion of the  pupil of the eye when it is
exposed to a bright light. 
vitamin Any of a group of complex org-
anic substances that are essential in
small amounts for the normal function-
ing of the body. There are 13 vitamins: 
A, C, D, E, K, B12, and 7 grouped under
the  vitamin B complex. Apart from the 
B vitamin niacin and vitamin D, which
the body can synthesize itself, vitamins
must be obtained from the diet. A var-
ied diet is likely to contain adequate
amounts of all the vitamins, but vitamin
supplements may be helpful for some
people, such as young children, women
who are pregnant or breast-feeding, or
those taking drugs that interfere with
vitamin function.
Vitamins can be categorized as fat-
soluble or water-soluble.
The fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K)
are absorbed with fats from the intestine
into the bloodstream and then stored
in fatty tissue (mainly in the liver). Body
reserves of some of these vitamins last
for several years, so a daily intake is not
usually necessary. Deficiency of a fat-
soluble vitamin is usually due to a
disorder in which intestinal absorption
of fats is impaired (see malabsorption)
or to a prolonged poor diet. 
Vitamin C,  B12, and those of the B
complex are water-soluble. Vitamin C
and B complex vitamins can be stored
in the body in only limited amounts and
are excreted in the urine if taken in great-
er amounts than needed. A regular intake
is therefore essential to  prevent  defi-
ciency. However, vitamin B12 is storedin
the liver; these stores may last for years. 
The role of all the vitamins in the body
is not fully understood. Most vitamins
586
VISION TESTS VITAMIN
V
Phoropter Adjustable arm
Test lens587
have several important actions on 1 or
more body systems, and many are
involved in the activities of enzymes. 
vitamin A A fat-soluble  vitamin  essen-
tial for normal growth, for the formation
of bones and teeth, for cell structure,
for night vision, and for protecting the
linings of the respiratory, digestive, and
urinary tracts against infection.
Vitamin A is absorbed by the body in
the form of retinol. This is found in liver,
fish-liver oils, egg yolk, dairy produce,and
is added to margarines. Carotene, which
the body converts into retinol, is found
in various vegetables and fruits.
Vitamin A deficiency is rare in deve-
loped countries. In most cases, it is due
to malabsorption. Vitamin A deficiency
may also result from long-term treat-
ment with certain  lipid-lowering drugs.
Deficiency is common in some develop-
ing countries due to poor diet. The first
symptom of deficiency is night blindness,
followed by dryness and inflammation
of the eyes (see  xerophthalmia),  kera-
tomalacia, and eventually blindness.
Deficiency also causes reduced resis-
tance to infection, dry skin, and, in
children, stunted growth.
Prolonged excessive intake of vitamin
A can  cause headache, nausea, loss of
appetite, skin  peeling, hair loss, and
irregular menstruation. In severe cases,
the liver and spleen become enlarged.
Excessive intake during pregnancy may
cause birth defects. In infants, excessive
intake may cause skull deformities,
which disappear if the diet is corrected.
The drug tretinoin (a derivative of vita-
min A) is used to treat severe acne.
vitamin B See  vitamin B12;  vitamin B
complex.
vitamin B12 A water-soluble  vitamin
that plays a vital role in the activities of
several  enzymes in the body. Vitamin
B12 is important in the production of
the genetic material of cells (and thus
in growth and development), in the pro-
duction of red blood cells in bone
marrow, in the utilization of folic acid
and carbohydrates in the diet, and in
the functioning of the nervous system.
Foods rich in vitamin B12 include liver,
kidney, chicken, beef, pork, fish, eggs,
and dairy products.
Deficiency is almost always due to 
the inability of the intestine to absorb
the vitamin, usually as a result of 
pernicious anaemia (see anaemia, meg-
aloblastic). Less commonly, deficiency
may result from  gastrectomy,  malab-
sorption, or  veganism. The effects of
vitamin  B12 deficiency are megaloblas-
tic anaemia, a sore mouth and tongue,
and symptoms caused by damage to
the spinal cord, such as numbness and
tingling in the limbs. There may also be
depression and memory loss. A high
intake of vitamin  B12 has no known
harmful effects.
vitamin B complex A group of water-
soluble  vitamins comprising thiamine
(vitamin  B1), riboflavin (vitamin B2),
niacin, pantothenic acid, pyridoxine (vit-
amin B6), biotin (vitamin H), and folic
acid. Vitamin B12 is discussed above.
Thiamine plays a role in the activities
of various enzymes  involved in the uti-
lization of carbohydrates and thus in the
functioning of nerves, muscles, and the
heart. Sources include whole-grain cere-
als, wholemeal breads, brown rice, pasta,
liver, kidney, pork, fish, beans, nuts, and
eggs. Those susceptible to deficiency
include elderly people on a poor diet,
and people who have  hyperthyroidism,
malabsorption, or severe alcohol depen-
dence. Deficiency may also occur as a
result of severe illness, surgery, or
injury. Mild deficiency may cause tired-
ness, irritability, and loss of appetite.
Severe deficiency may cause abdominal
pain,  constipation, depression, memory
impairment, and beriberi; in alcoholics,
it may cause  Wernicke每Korsakoff syn-
drome. Excessive intake is not known to
cause harmful effects.
Riboflavin is necessary for the activi-
ties of various enzymes involved in the
breakdown and utilization of carbohy-
drates, fats, and proteins; the production
of energy in cells; the utilization of
other B vitamins; and hormone produc-
tion by the adrenal glands. Liver, whole
grains, milk, eggs, and brewer＊s yeast
are good sources. People who are sus-
ceptible to riboflavin deficiency include
those taking phenothiazine antipsychotic
drugs, tricyclic  antidepressant drugs, or
oestrogen-containing oral contraceptives,
VITAMIN B COMPLEX VITAMIN A
V588
and those with malabsorption or severe
alcohol dependence. Riboflavin defi-
ciency may also occur as a result of
serious illness, surgery, or injury. Pro-
longed deficiency may cause soreness
of the tongue and the corners of the
mouth, and eye disorders such as
amblyopia and  photophobia. Excessive
intake of riboflavin is not known to have
any harmful effects.
Niacin plays an essential role in the
activities of various enzymes involved in
the metabolism of carbohydrates and
fats, the functioning of the nervous and
digestive systems, the manufacture of
sex hormones, and the maintenance of
healthy skin. The main dietary sources
are liver, lean meat, fish, nuts, and dried
beans. Niacin can be made in the body
from tryptophan (an  amino acid). Most
cases of deficiency are due to malab-
sorption disorders or to severe alcohol
dependence. Prolonged niacin deficiency
causes pellagra. Excessive intake is not
known to cause harmful effects.
Pantothenic acid is essential for the
activities of various enzymes involved in
the metabolism of carbohydrates and
fats, the manufacture of  corticosteroids
and  sex hormones, the utilization of
other vitamins, the functioning of the
nervous system and adrenal glands, and
growth and development. It is present
in almost all vegetables, cereals, and
animal foods. Deficiency of pantothenic
acid usually occurs as a result of mal-
absorption or alcoholism, but may also
occur after severe illness, surgery, or
injury. The effects include fatigue,
headache, nausea, abdominal pain,
numbness and tingling, muscle cramps,
and susceptibility to respiratory in-
fections. In severe cases, a peptic ulcer
may develop. Excessive intake has no
known harmful effects.
Pyridoxine aids the activities of vari-
ous enzymes and hormones involved in
the utilization of carbohydrates, fats,
and proteins, in the manufacture of red
blood cells and antibodies, in the func-
tioning of the digestive and nervous
systems, and in the maintenance of
healthy skin. Dietary sources are liver,
chicken, pork, fish, whole grains, wheat-
germ, bananas, potatoes, and dried
beans. Pyridoxine is also manufactured
by intestinal bacteria. People who are
susceptible to pyridoxine deficiency
include elderly people who have a poor
diet, those with malabsorption or severe
alcohol dependence, or those who are
taking certain drugs (including  penicil-
lamine and  isoniazid). Deficiency may
cause weakness, irritability, depression,
skin disorders, inflammation of the
mouth and tongue,  anaemia, and, in
infants, seizures. In very large amounts,
pyridoxine may cause neuritis. 
Biotin is essential for the activities of
various enzymes involved in the break-
down of fatty acids and carbohydrates
and for the excretion of the waste prod-
ucts of protein breakdown. It is present
in many foods, especially liver, peanuts,
dried beans, egg yolk, mushrooms,
bananas, grapefruit, and watermelon.
Biotin is also manufactured by bacteria
in the intestines. Deficiency may occur
during prolonged treatment with antibi-
otics or  sulphonamide drugs. Symptoms
are weakness, tiredness, poor appetite,
hair loss, depression, inflammation of
the tongue, and eczema. Excessive
intake has no known harmful effects.
Folic acid is vital for various enzymes
involved in the manufacture of  nucleic
acids and consequently for growth and
reproduction, the production of red
blood cells, and the functioning of the
nervous system. Sources include green
vegetables, mushrooms, liver, nuts, dried
beans, peas, egg yolk, and wholemeal
bread. Mild deficiency is common, but
can usually be corrected by increasing
dietary intake. More severe deficiency
may occur during pregnancy or breast-
feeding, in premature or low-birthweight
infants, in people undergoing  dialysis,
in people with certain blood disorders,
psoriasis, malabsorption, or alcohol de-
pendence, and in people taking certain
drugs. The main effects include anae-
mia, sores around the mouth, and, in
children, poor growth. Folic acid sup-
plements taken just before conception,
and for the first 12 weeks of pregnancy,
have been shown to reduce the risk of 
a neural tube defect.
vitamin C A water-soluble vitamin that
plays an essential role in the activities
VITAMIN C VITAMIN C
V589
of various enzymes. Vitamin C is impor-
tant for the growth and maintenance of
healthy bones, teeth, gums, ligaments,
and blood vessels; in the production of
certain  neurotransmitters and adrenal
gland hormones; in the response of the
immune system to infection; in wound
healing; and in the absorption of iron.
The main dietary sources are fruits
and vegetables. Considerable amounts
of vitamin C are lost when foods are
processed, cooked, or kept warm.
Mild deficiency of vitamin C may re-
sult from a serious injury or burn, major
surgery, the use of  oral contraceptives,
fever, or continual inhalation of carbon
monoxide (from traffic fumes or tobacco
smoke). It may cause weakness, general
aches, swollen gums, and  nosebleeds.
More serious deficiency is usually
caused by a very restricted diet. Severe
deficiency leads to scurvy and anaemia.
If the daily dose of vitamin C exceeds
about 1g, it may cause nausea, stomach
cramps, diarrhoea, or kidney stones
(see calculi, urinary tract).
vitamin D The collective term for a
group of substances that help to regu-
late the balance of  phosphate and
calcium in the body, aid calcium absorp-
tion in the intestine, and promote strong
bones and teeth.
Good sources include oily fish, liver,
and egg yolk; vitamin D is also added to
margarines. In the body, vitamin D is
synthesized by the action of ultraviolet 
light on a particular chemical in the skin.
Deficiency may occur in people with a
poor diet, in premature infants, and in
those deprived of sunlight. It can also
result from malabsorption. Other causes
include liver or kidney disorders and
some genetic defects. Prolonged use of
certain drugs, such as  phenytoin, may
also lead to deficiency. Deficiency in
young children causes  rickets; long-term
deficiency in adults leads to osteomalacia.
Excessive intake of vitamin D may
lead to  hypercalcaemia and abnormal
calcium deposits in the soft tissues,
kidneys, and blood vessel walls. In chil-
dren, it may cause growth retardation.
vitamin E The collective term for a group
of substances that are essential for nor-
mal cell structure, for maintaining the 
activities of certain enzymes, and for the
formation of red blood cells. Vitamin E
also protects the lungs and other tissues
from damage by pollutants and is 
believed to slow aging of cells. Sources
include vegetable oils, nuts, meat, green
vegetables, cereals, and egg yolk.
Dietary deficiency is rare; deficiency is
most common in people with  malab-
sorption, certain liver disorders, and in
premature infants. It leads to the de-
struction of red blood cells, which
eventually leads to anaemia. In infants,
deficiency causes irritability and oedema.
Prolonged excessive intake of vitamin
E may cause abdominal pain, nausea,
and diarrhoea. It may also reduce intes-
tinal absorption of vitamins A, D, and K.
vitamin K A fat-soluble vitamin that is
essential for the formation in the liver
of substances that promote blood clot-
ting. Good sources are green vegetables,
vegetable oils, egg yolk, cheese, pork,
and liver. Vitamin K is also manufac-
tured by bacteria in the intestine.
Dietary deficiency rarely occurs. De-
ficiency may develop in people with
malabsorption, certain liver disorders, or
chronic diarrhoea. It may also result
from prolonged treatment with  antibi-
otics. Newborns lack the intestinal
bacteria that produce vitamin K and are
routinely given supplements to prevent
deficiency. Vitamin K deficiency may
cause nosebleeds and bleeding from
the gums, intestine, and urinary tract. In
rare, severe cases, brain haemorrhage
may result. Excessive intake of vitamin
K is not known to cause harmful effects.
vitamin supplements A group of diet-
ary preparations containing 1 or more
vitamins. Most healthy people who have
a balanced diet do not need them. Sup-
plements are used to treat diagnosed
vitamin deficiency. They are also given
to prevent vitamin deficiency in suscep-
tible people, such as those who have
increased requirements (for example,
women who are pregnant or breast-
feeding); those who follow a restricted
diet (in  veganism, for example); those
with severe  alcohol dependence; and
people who have  malabsorption,  liver
disorders,  kidney disorders, or another
serious illness or injury. In addition,
VITAMIN SUPPLEMENTS VITAMIN D
Vvitamins are used to treat certain disor-
ders. For example, vitamin D is used to
treat  osteomalacia, and vitamin A deri-
vatives are given for severe acne. 
vitiligo A common disorder of skin pig-
mentation in which patches of skin,
most commonly on the face, hands,
armpits, and groin, lose their colour.
Vitiligo is thought to be an autoimmune
disorder. It may occur at any age but
usually develops in early adulthood. 
Spontaneous repigmentation occurs
in some cases. A course of phototherapy
using PUVA can also induce repigmen-
tation of the skin, and creams containing
corticosteroid drugs may help.
vitreous haemorrhage Bleeding into
the  vitreous humour. A common cause
is diabetic  retinopathy. Vitreous haem-
orrhage often affects vision; a major
haemorrhage causes poor vision until
the blood is reabsorbed, which may not
be for several months, if at all.
vitreous humour The transparent, gel-
like body that fills the rear compartment
of the  eye between the crystalline lens
and the retina. The vitreous humour
consists almost entirely of water. 
vivisection The performance of a sur-
gical operation on a live animal,
particularly for research purposes. (See
also animal experimentation.)
vocal cords Two fibrous sheets of tis-
sue in the  larynx that are responsible
for voice production. The vocal cords
VOCAL CORDS
are attached at the front to the thyroid
cartilage and at the rear to the aryten-
oid cartilages. To produce sound, the
vocal cords, which normally form a V-
shaped opening, close and vibrate as
air expelled from the lungs passes
between them. Alterations in cord ten-
sion produce sounds of different pitch,
which are modified by the tongue,
mouth, and lips to form speech. 
voice-box See larynx.
voice, loss of Inability to speak norm-
ally. Temporary partial loss of voice
commonly results from straining of the
muscles of the  larynx through overuse
of the voice or from inflammation of the
vocal cords  in  laryngitis. Persistent or
recurrent voice loss may be due to
polyps on the vocal cords, thickening of
the cords in  hypothyroidism, or inter-
ference with the nerve supply to the
larynx muscles due to cancer of the lar-
ynx, thyroid gland, or oesophagus. Total
loss of voice is rare and is usually of
psychological origin. (See also  hoarse-
ness; larynx, disorders of.)
Volkmann＊s contracture A disorder
in which the wrist and fingers become
permanently fixed in a bent position. It
occurs because of an inadequate blood
supply to the forearm muscles that con-
trol the wrist and fingers as a result of
an injury. Initially, the fingers become
cold, numb, and white or blue. Finger
movements are weak and painful, and
there is no pulse at the wrist. Unless
treatment is started within a few hours,
wrist and finger deformity develops.
Treatment is by manipulation back
into position of any displaced bones,
followed, if necessary, by surgical res-
toration of blood flow in the forearm. If
there is permanent deformity,  physio-
therapy may help to restore function.
volvulus Twisting of a loop of  intestine
or, in rare cases, of the stomach. Volvu-
lus is a serious condition that causes
obstruction of the passage of intestinal
contents (see  intestine, obstruction of)
and a risk of strangulation. If strangula-
tion occurs, blockage of blood flow to
the affected area leads to potentially
fatal gangrene. The symptoms of volvu-
lus are severe episodes of abdominal
pain followed by vomiting. Volvulus may
590
VITILIGO VOLVULUS
V
Arytenoid cartilages
Vocal cords
Trachea
Cut edge of 
thyroid cartilage
SIDE VIEW OF LARYNX LOCATION
Ligament
Larynx591
be present from birth or may be a result
of  adhesions. It requires emergency
treatment, usually by surgery. 
vomiting Involuntary forcible expulsion
of stomach contents through the mouth.
Vomiting may be preceded by nausea,
pallor, sweating, excessive salivation,
and slowed heart-rate. It occurs when
the vomiting centre in the brainstem is
activated by signals from 1 of 3 places
in the body: the digestive tract; the bal-
ancing mechanism of the inner  ear; or
the brain, either due to thoughts and
emotions or via the part of the brain
that responds to poisons in the body.
The vomiting centre sends messages to
both the  diaphragm, which presses
down on the stomach, and the abdomi-
nal wall, which presses inwards, thereby
expelling the stomach contents upwards
through the oesophagus.
Vomiting may be due to overindulgence
in food or alcohol, is a common side
effect of many drugs, and may follow
general  anaesthesia. Vomiting is also
common in gastrointestinal disorders
such as peptic ulcer, acute appendicitis,
gastroenteritis, and  food poisoning. Less
commonly, it is due to obstruction (see
pyloric stenosis; intussusception) or a tu-
mour of the digestive tract. It may also
be due to inflammation (see  hepatitis;
pancreatitis; cholecystitis).
Other possible causes are pressure on
the skull (see encephalitis; hydrocepha-
lus; brain tumour; head injury; migraine),
conditions affecting the ear＊s balancing
mechanism (see M谷ni豕re＊s disease; laby-
rinthitis; motion sickness), and hormonal
disorders (see Addison＊s disease). 
Vomiting may be a symptom of keto-
acidosis in poorly controlled  diabetes
mellitus. It may also be a symptom of an
emotional problem or be part of the
disorders anorexia nervosa or bulimia.
Persistent vomiting requires medical
investigation. Treatment depends on the
cause. Antiemeticsmay be given. (See also
vomiting blood; vomiting in pregnancy.)
vomiting blood A symptom of bleed-
ing from  within the digestive tract.
Vomiting blood may be caused by a 
tear in the lower oesophagus (see Mal-
lory每Weiss syndrome), bleeding from
oesophageal varices, erosive  gastritis,
peptic ulcer, or, rarely,  stomach cancer.
Blood can alsobe vomited if it is swal-
lowed during a nosebleed. Vomited
blood may be dark red, brown, black, or
may resemble coffee grounds. Vomiting
of bloodis often accompaniedby the
passing of black, tarry faeces.
The cause of vomiting blood is investi-
gated by endoscopy of the oesophagus
and stomach, or by barium X-ray exami-
nations. If blood loss is severe,  blood
transfusion, and possibly surgery to
stop the bleeding, may be required.
vomiting in pregnancy Nausea and
vomiting in early  pregnancy are com-
mon and are most likely to be caused
by changes in the hormone levels. Vom-
iting occurs most frequently in the
morning, but it may occur at any time. It
is sometimes precipitated by stress,
travelling, or food. 
In rare cases, the vomiting becomes
severe and prolonged. This can cause
dehydration, nutritional deficiency, altera-
tions in blood acidity, and weight loss.
Immediate hospital admission is then
required to replace lost fluids and
chemicals by  intravenous infusion, to
rule out any serious underlying disor-
der, and to control the vomiting.
von Recklinghausen＊s disease An-
other name for neurofibromatosis.
von Willebrand＊s disease An inheri-
tedlifelong bleeding disorder similar to
haemophilia. People with the condition
have a reduced concentration in their
blood of a substance called von Wille-
brand factor, which helps  platelets in
the blood to plug injured blood vessel
walls and forms part of  factor VIII (a
substance vital to blood coagulation).
Symptoms of deficiency of this factor
include excessive bleeding from the
gums and from cuts and nosebleeds.
Women may have heavy menstrual bleed-
ing. In severe cases, bleeding into joints
and muscles may occur.
The disease is diagnosed by  blood-
clotting tests and measurement of blood
levels of von Willebrand factor. Bleeding
episodes can be prevented or controlled
by desmopressin (a substance resem-
bling ADH). Factor VIII or concentrated
von Willebrand factor may also be used
to treat bleeding.
VON WILLEBRAND＊S DISEASE VOMITING
V592
voyeurism The observation, on a regu-
lar basis, of unsuspecting people who
may be naked, getting undressed, or
engaged in sexual  activity, in order to
achieve sexual arousal.
VSD The abbreviation for  ventricular
septal defect.
vulva The external part of the female
genitalia, comprising the  clitoris and 2
pairs of skin folds called labia.
The most common symptom affecting
the vulva is  vulval itching. Various skin
disorders, such as dermatitis, may affect
the vulva. Specific vulval conditions
include  genital  warts,  vulvitis,  vulvo-
vaginitis, and cancer (vulva, cancer of).
vulva, cancer of A rare disorder that
most commonly affects postmenopausal
women. Cancer of the vulva may be pre-
ceded by vulval itching, but in many
cases the first symptom is a lump or
painful ulcer on the vulva.
A diagnosis of vulval cancer is made
by  biopsy. Treatment is by surgical
removal of the affected area. The out-
look depends on how soon the cancer is
diagnosed and treated.
vulval itching Irritation of the  vulva.
Most commonly, vulval itching is dueto
an allergic reaction to chemicals in
spermicidal or hygiene products. Itching
is also common after the  menopause,
when it is due to low levels of oestrogen.
In addition, vulval itching may be
caused by a vaginal discharge due to
infection (see vaginitis) or by vulval skin
changes (see vulvitis).
Treatment may be with  antibiotics or
hormones, depending on the cause.
vulvitis Inflammation of the  vulva.
Infections that may cause vulvitis are
candidiasis, genital herpes (see  herpes,
genital), and warts (see warts, genital).
Infestations with  pubic lice or  scabies
are other possible causes. Vulvitis may
also occur as a result of changes in the
vulval skin. These changes tend to affect
women after the menopause, although
there is no apparent trigger. They may
take the form of red or white patches
and/or thickened or thinned areas that
may be inflamed. Other possible causes
of vulvitis include allergic reactions to
hygiene products, excessive vaginal dis-
charge, or urinary incontinence.
Treatment depends on the cause. A
combination of drugs applied to the vulva
and good hygiene is usually recom-
mended. A biopsy may be taken, if there
are skin changes, to exclude the slight
possibility of vulval cancer. (See also
vulvovaginitis; vaginitis.)
vulvovaginitis Inflammation of the vulva
and vagina. Vulvovaginitis is often pro-
voked as a result of the infections
candidiasis or  trichomoniasis. (See also
vaginitis; vulvitis.)
VOYEURISM VULVOVAGINITIS
V593
walking Movement of the body by lifting
the feet alternately and bringing 1 foot
into contact with the ground before the
other starts to leave it. A person＊s gait is
determined by body shape, size, and
posture.  The age at which children first
walk varies enormously.
Walking is controlled by nerve signals
from the brain＊s motor cortex (see cere-
brum), basal ganglia, and cerebellum that
travel via the spinal cord to the muscles.
Abnormal gait may be caused by joint
stiffness, muscle weakness (sometimes
due to conditions such as poliomyelitis
or muscular dystrophy), or skeletal abnor-
malities (see, for example,  talipes; hip,
congenital dislocation of; scoliosis; bone
tumour; arthritis). Children may develop
knock-knee or bowleg; synovitis of the hip
and  Perthes＊ disease are also common.
Adolescents may develop a painful limp
due to a slipped epiphysis (see femoral
epiphysis, slipped) or to fracture or dis-
ease of the tibia, fibula or femur.
Abnormal gait may also be the result
of neurological disorders such as stroke
(commonly resulting in hemiplegia), par-
kinsonism,peripheral  neuritis, multiple
sclerosis, various forms of myelitis, and
chorea. M谷ni豕re＊s disease may cause sev-
ere loss of balance and instability.
walking aids Equipment for increasing
the mobility of people who have a dis-
order that affects their ability to walk.
Aids include walking sticks, crutches,
and walking frames.
walking, delayed Most children walk
by around 15 months of age. Delayed
walking may be suspected if the child is
unable to walk unassisted by 18 months
(see developmental delay).
warfarin An anticoagulant drug used to
treat and prevent abnormal  blood clot-
ting. Warfarin is used to treat deep vein
thrombosis,  pulmonary embolism, and
people with atrial fibrillation who are at
risk of an embolism. It is also prescribed
to prevent emboli from developing on
replacement valves (see heart-valve sur-
gery). A faster-acting anticoagulant, such
as  heparin, may also be prescribed for
the first few days following a deep-vein
thrombosis or pulmonary embolism.
Warfarin may cause abnormal bleeding
in different parts of the body, so regular
tests are carried out to allow careful
regulation of dosage. Warfarin may also
cause nausea, diarrhoea and a rash.
wart A common, contagious, harmless
growth that occurs on the skin or mucous
membranes. Only the topmost layer of
skin is affected. An overgrowth of cells
in this layer causes a visible lump to
develop. Warts are caused by the human
papillomavirus, of which at least 30 dif-
ferent types are known. These cause
different types of warts at various sites,
such as on the hands or genitals.
Flat warts are flesh-coloured, sometimes
itchy lumps with flat tops that occur
mainly on the wrists, backs of hands, and
face.  About 50 per cent of warts disap-
pear in 6每12 months without treatment.
However, genital warts should be treated
promptly. Common, flat, and plantar
warts can sometimes be destroyed using
a wart-removing liquid or special plaster.
Several treatments may be necessary,
and sometimes the wart returns. Warts
are commonly treated by cryosurgery. 
WART WALKING
W
Raised surface of wart
Epidermis
Dermis
Excess cells
produced
Basal cell
layer
WART
Nerve
fibre
Blood vessels 
W594
wart, plantar A hard, horny, and rough-
surfaced area on the sole of the foot
caused by a virus called a papillomavirus.
Plantar warts, also known as verrucas,
may occur singly or in clusters. The wart
is flattened and forced into the skin and
may cause discomfort or pain when
walking. Infection is usually acquired
from contaminated floors in swimming
pools and communal showers.
Many plantar warts disappear without
treatment, but some persist for years or
recur. They can be removed by  cryo-
surgery or by applying plasters or gel
containing salicylic acid.
warts, genital Fleshy, painless, usually
soft lumps that grow in and around the
entrance of the vagina, around the anus,
andon the penis. Genital warts are
transmitted by sexual contact and are
caused by a papillomavirus. There may
be an interval of from a few weeks up to
18 months between time of infection
and the appearance of the warts.
Genital warts have been linked with
the development of cervical cancer (see
cervix, cancer of). They may be removed
by cryosurgery or by the application of
the drug podophyllin, but there is a ten-
dency for them to recur.
wasp stings See insect stings.
water A simple compound that is essen-
tial for all life. Its molecular structure is
H2O (2 atoms of hydrogen bonded to 1
of oxygen). Water is the most common
substance in the body,accounting for
about 99 per cent of all molecules, but
a smaller percentage of  total body
weight. Approximately 2 thirdsof the
body＊s water content is contained with-
in the body cells, and the remaining
third is extracellular (found, for example,
in the blood plasma, lymph, and cere-
brospinal and tissue fluid).
Water provides the medium in which
all metabolic reactions take place (see
metabolism), and transports substances
around the body. The blood plasma car-
ries water to all body tissues, and excess
water from tissues for elimination via
the  liver, kidneys, lungs, and  skin. The
passage of water in the tissue fluid into
and out of cells takes place by osmosis.
Water is taken into the body in food
and drink and is lost in urine and faeces,
as exhaled water vapour, and by sweat-
ing (see  dehydration). The amount of
water excreted in urine is regulated by
the kidneys (see also ADH). Extra water
is needed to excrete excess amounts of
substances, such as sugar or salt, in the
blood, and high water intake is essen-
tial in hot climates where a large amount
of water is lost in sweat.
In some disorders, such as kidney fail-
ure or heart failure, insufficient water is
excreted in the urine, resulting in oedema.
water-borne infection A disease caus-
edby infective or parasitic organisms
transmitted via water. Infections can be
contracted if infected water is drunk, if
it contaminates food, or if individuals
swim or wade in it. Worldwide, contami-
nation of drinking water is an important
mode of transmission for various dis-
eases including  hepatitis A, many viral
and bacterial causes of diarrhoea, typhoid
fever, cholera, amoebiasis, and some
types of worm infestation.
Swimming in polluted water should
be avoided because, if swallowed, there
is a risk of contracting disease. In addi-
tion, a form of  leptospirosis is caused 
by contact with water contaminated by
rat＊surine. In tropical countries, there is
also a risk of contracting schistosomiasis
(bilharzia), which is a serious disease
caused by a fluke that can burrow through
the swimmer＊s skin.
waterbrash The sudden filling of the
mouth with tasteless saliva. It is not to
be confused with acid reflux (the regur-
gitation of gastric juices), which has an
unpleasant, sour taste. Waterbrash is
normally accompanied by other symp-
toms, and usually indicates a disorder
of the upper gastrointestinal tract.
Waterhouse每Friderichsen syndrome
A serious condition caused by infection
of the bloodstream by bacteria of the
meningococcus group. The main features
are bleeding into the skin, low blood
pressure, and  shock. Without urgent
medical treatment, coma and death fol-
low in a few hours. The syndrome is
often associated with meningitis.
watering eye An increase in volume of
the tear film, usually producing epiph-
ora (overflow of  tears). Watering may 
be caused by excess tear production
WART, PLANTAR WATERING EYE
W595
due to emotion, conjunctival or corneal
irritation, or an obstruction to the chan-
nel that drains tears from the eye. (See
also lacrimal apparatus.)
water intoxication A condition that is
caused by excessive water retention in
the brain. The principal symptoms are
headaches, dizziness, nausea, confu-
sion, and, in severe cases, seizures and
unconsciousness.
Various disorders can disrupt the
water balance in the body, leading to
accumulation of water in the tissues.
Examples include kidney failure, liver cir-
rhosis, severe  heart failure, diseases of
the  adrenal glands, and certain lung or
ovarian tumours producing a substance
similar to ADH (antidiuretic hormone).
Water intoxication is also seen in asso-
ciation with the use of Ecstasy (MDMA),
during which excessive amounts of
water are drunk. There is also a risk of
water intoxication after surgery, caused
by increased ADH production.
water on the brain A nonmedical
term for hydrocephalus.
water on the knee A popular term for
accumulation of fluid within or around
the knee joint. The most common cause
is bursitis. (See also effusion, joint).
water retention Accumulation of fluid
in body tissues (see oedema).
water tablets A nonmedical term for
diuretic drugs.
wax bath A type of  heat treatment in
which hot liquid wax is applied to a part
of the body to relieve pain and stiffness
in inflamed or injured joints. Wax baths
may be used to treat the hands of peo-
ple with rheumatoid arthritis.
weakness A term used to describe a lack
of vigour or strength. This is a common
symptom of a wide range of conditions,
including  anaemia, emotionalproblems,
and various disorders affecting the heart,
nervous system, bones, joints, and mus-
cles. When associated with emotional
disorders, weakness may represent a lack
of desire or ambition, rather than loss
of muscle strength.
More specifically, the term describes
loss of power in particular muscle
groups, which may be accompanied by
muscle wasting  and loss of sensation.
(See also paralysis.)
weal A raised bump on the skin that 
is paler than the adjacent tissue and
which may be surrounded by an area of
red inflammation. Weals are character-
istic of urticaria.
weaning The gradual substitution of
solid foods for milk or milk formula in
an infant＊s diet (see feeding, infant).
webbing A flap of skin, such as might
occur between adjacent fingers or toes.
Webbing is a common congenital abnor-
mality that often runs in families and
which may affect 2 or more digits. Mild
webbing is completely harmless, but sur-
gical correction may be performed for
cosmetic reasons. In severe cases, adja-
cent digits may be completely fused (see
syndactyly). Webbing of the neck is a
feature of Turner＊s syndrome.
Wegener＊s granulomatosis A rare
disorder in which  granulomas (nodular
collections of abnormal cells), associated
with areas of chronic tissue inflamma-
tion due to  vasculitis, develop in the
nasal passages, lungs, and kidneys. It is
thought that the condition is an  auto-
immune disorder (in which the body＊s
natural defences attack its own tissues).
Principal symptoms include a bloody
nasal discharge, coughing (which some-
times produces bloodstained sputum),
breathing difficulty, chest pain, and
blood in the urine. There may also be
loss of appetite, weight loss, weakness,
fatigue, and joint pains.
Treatment is with  immunosuppressant
drugs, such as cyclophosphamide or aza-
thioprine, combined with  corticosteroids
to alleviate symptoms and attempt to
bring about a remission. With prompt
treatment, most people recover com-
pletely within about a year, although
kidney failure occasionally develops.
Without treatment, complications may
occur, including perforation of the nasal
septum, causing deformity of the nose;
inflammation of the eyes; a rash, nod-
ules, or ulcers on the skin; and damage
to the heart muscle, which may be fatal.
weight The heaviness of a person or
object. In children, weight is routinely
used as an index of growth. In healthy
adults, weight remains more or less sta-
ble as dietary energy intake matches
energy expenditure (see  metabolism).
WEIGHT WATER INTOXICATION
W144146148150152154156158160162164166168170172174
57585960616263646566676869707172 73747576
176178180182184186188190192194 cm
in
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
lb kg
596
Weight loss or weight gain occurs if the
net balance is disturbed.
Weight can be compared with standar-
dized charts for height, age, and sex. At
all ages, divergence from the normal
weight for height may have medical
implications. For example, if weight is
below 80 per cent of the standard
weight for height, the individual＊s nutri-
tion is probably inadequate as a result
of poor diet or disease, and if 20 per
cent above the standard, he or she is
considered to be suffering from obesity.
An alternative method of assessment is
use of the  body mass index (BMI, or
Quetelet＊s index), obtained by dividing
weight in kilograms by the square of
height in metres. A healthy weight is
20每25 BMI; a BMI of greater than 25 indi-
cates that a person is overweight.
weight loss This occurs any time there
is a decrease in energy intake compared
with energy expenditure. The decrease
may be due to deliberate weight reduc-
tion or a change in diet or activity level.
It may also be a symptom of a disorder.
Unexplained weight loss should always
be investigated by a doctor.
Many diseases disrupt the appetite,
which may lead to weight loss. Depres-
sion reduces the motivation to eat, peptic
ulcer causes pain and possible food
avoidance, and some kidney disorders
cause loss of appetite due to the effect of
uraemia. In anorexia nervosa and bulimia,
complex psychological factors affect an
individual＊s eating pattern.
Digestive disorders, such as  gastro-
enteritis, lead to weight loss through
vomiting. Cancer of the oesophagus (see
oesophagus, cancer of) and  stomach
cancer cause loss of weight, as does
malabsorption of nutrients in certain
disorders of the intestine or pancreas.
Some disorders cause weight loss by
increasing the rate of metabolic activity
in cells. Examples are any type of cancer,
chronic infection such as  tuberculosis,
and hyperthyroidism. Untreated diabetes
mellitus also causes weight loss due to
a number of factors.
weight reduction The process of los-
ing excess body fat. A person who is
severely overweight (see obesity) is more
at risk of various illnesses, such as dia-
betes mellitus, hypertension (high blood
pressure), and heart disease.
The most efficient way to lose weight
is to eat 500每1,000 kcal (2,100每4,200 kJ)
a day less than the body＊s total energy
requirements. Exercise also forms an
extremely  important part of a reducing
regime, burning  excess energy and
improving muscle tone. 
In most circumstances, drugs play lit-
tle part in a weight loss programme.
WEIGHT LOSS WEIGHT REDUCTION
W
WEIGHT
WEIGHT
HEIGHT
Overweight
(BMI > 25)
Underweight 
(BMI < 20)
WEIGHT ASSESSMENT CHART
Healthy weight 
(BMI 20每25)597
However,  sibutramine and  orlistat may
be useful adjuncts to a reducing diet
and may be appropriate for some peo-
ple with a high BMI (see  body mass
index). Appetite suppressants related to
amfetamines are not recommended.
Weil＊s disease Another name for lepto-
spirosis.
welder＊s eye Acute  conjunctivitis and
keratopathy (corneal damage) caused by
the intense  ultraviolet light emitted by
an electric welding arc. Welder＊s eye,
which is also known as arc eye, results
from the failure to wear adequate eye
protection while welding.
wen A name for a sebaceous cyst.
Werdnig每Hoffmann disease A very
rare inherited disorder of the  nervous
system that affects infants. Also known
as infantile spinal muscular atrophy,
Werdnig每Hoffmann disease is a type of
motor neuron disease, affecting the nerve
cells in the spinal cord that control
muscle movement.
Marked floppiness and paralysis occur
during the first few months, and affected
children rarely survive beyond age 3.
There is no cure for the disease. Treat-
ment aims to keep the affected infant as
comfortable as possible.
Wernicke每Korsakoff syndrome An
uncommon brain disorder almost always
related to malnutrition occurring in
chronic  alcohol dependence, but occa-
sionally due to that which occurs in
other conditions, such as  cancer. Wer-
nicke每Korsakoff syndrome is caused by
deficiency of thiamine (see  vitamin B
complex), which affects the brain and
nervous system.
The disease consists of 2 stages: Wer-
nicke＊s encephalopathy and Korsakoff＊s
psychosis. Wernicke＊s encephalopathy
usually develops suddenly and pro-
duces  nystagmus (abnormal, jerky eye
movements), ataxia (difficulty in coordi-
nating body movements), slowness, and
confusion. Sufferers usually have signs
of neuropathy, such as loss of sensation,
pins-and-needles, or impaired reflexes.
The level of consciousness falls progres-
sively and may lead to coma and death
unless treated. The condition is a medi-
cal emergency. Treatment with high
doses of intravenous thiamine often
reverses most of the symptoms, some-
times within a few hours.
Korsakoff＊s psychosis may follow Wer-
nicke＊s encephalopathy if treatment is
not begun promptly enough. Symptoms
consist of severe  amnesia, apathy, and
disorientation. Korsakoff＊s psychosis is
usually irreversible.
Wernicke＊s area  An area of the cere-
bral cortex in the brain that is involved
in the interpretation of spoken and writ-
ten language.
Wernicke＊sencephalopathy See Wer-
nicke每Korsakoff syndrome.
West Nile virus A virus transmitted
from infected animals or birds to hum-
nans by a mosquito bite. In most cases,
there are either no symptoms or a flu-like
illness. Rarely, a serious and potentially
fatal illness, in which the virus infects
the brain, can develop. The virus is
found in Africa, Eastern Europe, West
Asia, the Middle East, and, since 1999,
the East coast of the US.
wet dream Ejaculation that occurs dur-
ing sleep. See also nocturnal emission.
wheelchair A chair mounted on wheels
used to provide mobility for a person
unable to walk. Manual wheelchairs are
designed so that the hand-rims can be
easily gripped by a disabled person.
They can also be pushed by a helper.
Powered wheelchairs use batteries and
are controlled electronically by finger or
chin pressure, or breath control.
wheeze A high-pitched, whistling sound
produced in the chest during breathing,
caused by narrowing of the airways. It is
a feature of asthma, bronchitis, bronchi-
olitis, and pulmonary oedema. Inhalation
of a foreign body may also be a cause.
(See also breathing difficulty.)
whiplash injury An injury to the soft
tissues, ligaments, and spinal joints of the
neck caused by a forcible and violent
bending of the neck backwards (hyper-
extension) and then forwards (flexion), or
vice versa. Such injury most commonly
results from sudden acceleration or de-
celeration, as occurs in a car collision. 
Damage to the spine usually involves
minor sprain of a neck ligament, or sub-
luxation (partial dislocation) of a cervical
joint. Occasionally, a ligament may rup-
ture or a cervical vertebra may fracture
WHIPLASH INJURY WEIL＊S DISEASE
WDiagnosis is through the identification
of whipworm eggs in the faeces. Treat-
ment is with anthelmintic drugs, such as
mebendazole. A heavy infestation may re-
quire more than 1 course of treatment.
whitehead A very common type of skin
blemish (see milia).
white matter Tissue in the nervous sys-
tem composed of nerve fibres (axons).
White matter makes up the bulk of the
cerebrum (the 2 large hemispheres of
the brain) and continues down into the
spinal cord; its main role is to transmit
nerve impulses. (See also grey matter.)
whitlow An abscess on the fingertip or
toe, causing the finger to swell and be-
come extremely painful and sensitive to
pressure and touch. It most commonly
develops from acute paronychia. A whit-
low may be due to the virus that causes
WHITE MATTER
(see spinal injury). Characteristically, pain
and stiffness in the neck are much worse
24 hours after the injury.
Treatment may include immobiliza-
tion in an orthopaedic collar,  analgesic
drugs, muscle-relaxant drugs, and phys-
iotherapy. It may take a few weeks before
full pain-free movement is possible.
Whipple＊s disease A rare disorder, also
called intestinal lipodystrophy, that can
affect many organs. Symptoms include
steatorrhoea as a result of malabsorption,
abdominal pain, joint pains, progressive
weight loss, swollen lymph nodes, anae-
mia, and fever. The heart, lungs, and
brain can also be affected. The condition
is most common in middle-aged men.
The cause is thought to be bacterial;
affected tissues are found to contain
macrophages (a type of scavenging cell)
containing rod-shaped bacteria. Treat-
ment is with antibiotic drugs for at least
1 year. Dietary supplements are used to
correct nutritional deficiencies occur-
ring as a result of malabsorption.
Whipple＊s operation A type of  panc-
reatectomy in which the head of the
pancreas and the loop of the duodenum
are surgically removed.
whipworm infestation Small, cylindrical
whip-like worms, 2.5每5 cm long, that live
in the human large intestine. Infestation
occurs worldwide but is most  common
in the tropics. Light infestation causes no
symptoms; heavy infestation can cause
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, and, some-
times, anaemia, since a small amount of
the host＊s blood is consumed every day. 
WHIPLASH INJURY
598
WHIPPLE＊S DISEASE WHITLOW
W
Cervical
vertebra
Cervical
joint
Ligaments
BACKWARD FORCE (HYPEREXTENSION) FORWARD FORCE (FLEXION)
Ligaments
Grey
matter
Cerebrum
Brain stem
Cerebellum
White matter
SECTION THROUGH BRAIN
Spinal cord599
herpes simplex or to a bacterial infec-
tion. In some cases, it may be necessary
to drain pus from the abscess.
WHO The commonly used abbreviation
for the World Health Organization.
whooping cough See pertussis.
will, living See living will.
Wilms＊ tumour A type of kidney cancer,
also called nephroblastoma, that occurs
mainly in children.
Wilson＊s disease A rare, inherited dis-
order in which copper accumulates in
the liver, resulting in conditions such as
hepatitis and cirrhosis. Copper is slowly
released into other body parts, damag-
ing the brain, causing mild intellectual
impairment, and leading to debilitating
rigidity, tremor, and dementia. Symp-
toms usually appear in adolescence but
can occur much earlier or later .Lifelong
treatment with  penicillamine is needed
and, if begun soon enough, can some-
times produce some improvement. If
the disease is discovered before the
onset of symptoms, the drug may pre-
vent them from developing.
wind A common name for gas in the gas-
trointestinal tract, which may be expelled
through the mouth (see  belching) or
passed through the anus (see flatus).
Babies often swallow air during feed-
ing which, unless the baby is ※winded§,
can accumulate in the stomach and
cause discomfort.
windpipe Another name for the trachea.
wiring of the jaws Immobilization of
the jaws by means of metal wires to
allow a fracture of the jaw to heal or as
part of a treatment for obesity.
When a fracture is being treated, the
jaws are kept wired in a fixed position for
about 6 weeks. For promoting weight
loss, the jaws are wired for as long as a
year. In both cases, the person is unable
to chew and can take only a liquid or
semi-liquid diet. This form of diet treat-
ment often fails because the person
resumes previous eating habits follow-
ing removal of the wires.
wisdom tooth One of the 4 rearmost
teeth, also known as 3rd molars. The
wisdom teeth normally erupt between
the ages of 17 and 21, but in some peo-
ple, 1 or more fails to develop or erupt.
In many cases, wisdom teeth are unable
to emerge fully from the gum as a result
of overcrowding (see impaction, dental).
witches＊ milk A thin, white discharge
from the nipple of a newborn infant,
caused by maternal hormones that
entered the fetus＊s circulation through
the placenta. Witches＊ milk occurs quite
commonly. It is usually accompanied by
enlargement of 1 or both of the baby＊s
breasts. The condition is harmless and
usually disappears spontaneously with-
in a few weeks.
withdrawal The process of retreating
from society and from relationships
with others; usually indicated by aloof-
ness, lack of interest in social activities,
preoccupation with one＊s own concerns,
and difficulty in communicating.
The term is also applied to the psy-
chological and physical symptoms that
develop on discontinuing use of a sub-
stance on which a person is dependent
(see withdrawal syndrome).
withdrawal bleeding Vaginal blood
loss that occurs when the body＊s level of
oestrogen or progesterone hormones or
progestogen drugs drops suddenly.
The withdrawal bleeding that occurs at
the end of each month＊s supply of com-
bined  oral contraceptive pills mimics
menstruation but is usually shorter and
lighter. Discontinuation of an oestrogen-
only or progestogen-only preparation
also produces bleeding, which may dif-
fer from normal menstruation in its
amount and duration.
withdrawal method See  coitus inter-
ruptus.
withdrawal syndrome Unpleasant men-
taland physical symptoms experienced
when a person stops using a drug on
which he or she is dependent (see drug
dependence). Withdrawal syndrome most
commonly occurs in those with alcohol
dependence or dependence on opioids,
in smokers, and in people addicted to
tranquillizers, amfetamines, cocaine, mari-
juana, and caffeine.
Alcohol withdrawal symptoms start 6每8
hours after cessation of intake and may
last up to 7 days. They include trembling
of the hands,nausea, vomiting, sweat-
ing, cramps, anxiety, and, sometimes,
seizures. (See also  confusion,  delirium
tremens, and hallucinations.)
WITHDRAWAL SYNDROME WHO
Wnotably smallpox, tuberculosis, and mal-
aria. Other functions include sponsoring
medical research programmes, organiz-
ing a network of collaborating national
laboratories, and providing expert advice
and specific targets to its 160 member
states with regard to health matters.
worm infestation Several types of worm,
or their larvae, existing as parasites of
humans. They may live in the intestines,
blood, lymphatic system, bile ducts, or
in organs such as the liver. In many
cases, they cause few or no symptoms,
but some can cause chronic illness.
There are 2 main classes:  roundworms
and  platyhelminths, which are subdiv-
ided into cestodes (tapeworms) and
trematodes (flukes).
Worm diseases found in developed
countries include threadworm infestation,
ascariasis, whipworm infestation, toxocar-
iasis, liver-fluke infestation, and various
tapeworm infestations. Those occurring
in tropical regions include  hookworm
infestation, filariasis,  guinea worm dis-
ease, and schistosomiasis.
Worms may be acquired by eating
undercooked, infected meat, by contact
with soil or water containing worm lar-
vae, or by accidental ingestion of worm
eggs from soil contaminated by infected
faeces. Most infestations can be easily
eradicated with anthelmintic drugs.
wound Any damage to the skin and/or
underlying tissues caused by an accident,
act of violence, or surgery. Wounds in
which the skin or mucous membrane is
broken are called open; those in which
they remain intact are termed closed.
WORM INFESTATION
600
Opioid withdrawal symptoms start after
8每12 hours and may last for 7每10 days.
Symptoms include restlessness, sweat-
ing, runny eyes and nose, yawning,
diarrhoea, vomiting, abdominal cramps,
dilated pupils, loss of appetite, irritabil-
ity,weakness, tremor, and depression.
Withdrawal symptoms from barbiturate
drugs and meprobamate start after 12每24
hours, beginning with  tremor,  anxiety,
restlessness, and weakness, sometimes
followed by delirium, hallucinations, and,
occasionally, seizures. A period of pro-
longed sleep occurs 3每8 days after onset.
Withdrawal from  benzodiazepine drugs
may begin much more slowly and can
be life-threatening.
Withdrawal symptoms from  nicotine
develop gradually over 24每48 hours and
include irritability, concentration prob-
lems, frustration, headaches, and anxiety.
Discontinuation of cocaine or amfe-
tamines results in extreme tiredness,
lethargy, and dizziness. Cocaine with-
drawal may also lead to tremor, severe
depression, and sweating.
Withdrawal symptoms from marijuana
include tremor, nausea, vomiting, diar-
rhoea,  sweating, irritability, and sleep
problems. Caffeine withdrawal may lead
to tiredness, headaches, and irritability.
Severe withdrawal syndromes require
medical treatment. Symptoms may be
suppressed by giving the patient small
quantities of the drug he or she had been
taking. More commonly, a substitute drug
is given, such as methadone for opioid
drugs or diazepam for alcohol. The dose
of the drug is then gradually reduced.
wobble board A balancing board used
during  physiotherapy to improve mus-
cle strength and coordination in the
feet, ankles, and legs. A wobble board is
sometimes used after an ankle sprain.
womb See uterus.
word blindness See alexia; dyslexia.
World Health Organization(WHO)
An international organization estab-
lished in 1948 as an agency of the
United Nations with responsibilities for
international health matters and public
health. The WHO headquarters are in
Geneva, Switzerland.
The WHO has campaigned effectively
against some infectious diseases, most
WOBBLE BOARD WOUND
W
Larva inside egg Threadworm egg
MICROSCOPIC VIEW OF WORM EGGSdisplaced backwards. In young children,
similar displacement results from a frac-
ture through the epiphysis (growing end)
of the radius. A  sprain can affect liga-
ments at the wrist joint, but most wrist
sprains are not severe. (See also carpal
tunnel syndrome; wrist-drop; tenosyn-
ovitis; and osteoarthritis.)
wrist-drop Inability to straighten the
wrist, so that the back of the hand can-
not be brought into line with the back
of the forearm. This causes weakness of
grip because the hand muscles can func-
tion efficiently only when the wrist is
held straight. 
Wrist-drop is caused by damage to the
radial nerve, either by prolonged pres-
sure in the armpit (see crutch palsy) or
by fracture of the humerus (see humerus,
fracture of). Treatment involves holding
the wrist straight. This may be achieved
by means of a splint, but if damage to
the radial nerve is permanent, the usual
treatment is arthrodesis (surgical fusion)
of the wrist bones in a straight position.
writer＊s cramp See cramp, writer＊s.
wry neck Abnormal tilting and twisting of
the head. It may be due to injury to, or
spasm of, the muscles on one side of the
neck (see torticollis), among other factors.
WRIST
601
Wounds can be divided into the follow-
ing categories: an incised wound; an
abrasion (or graze); a laceration; a pene-
trating wound; and a contusion. 
wound infection Any type of wound is
susceptible to the entry of bacteria; the
resultant infection can delay healing,
result in disability, and may even cause
death. Infection of a wound is indicated
by redness, swelling, warmth, pain, and
sometimes by the presence of pus or
the formation of an  abscess. Infection
may spread locally to adjacent organs
or tissue, or to more distant parts of the
body via the blood.
The type of infection depends upon
how the wound occurred. For example,
wounds brought into contact with soil
can result in  tetanus.  STAPHYLOCOCCI,
including  MRSA, are also common
wound infections.
Once infection is discovered, a sample
of blood or pus is taken and the patient
is given an antibiotic drug. Any abscess
should be drained surgically.
wrinkle A furrow in the skin. Wrinkling is
a natural feature of aging and is caused
by a loss of skin elasticity. Premature
deep wrinkling is usually due to overex-
posure to the ultraviolet rays in sunlight,
and to smoking.
No treatment can permanently restore
skin elasticity, although some vitamin A
derivatives are believed to reduce wrin-
kling. A  face-lift smoothes out wrinkles
by stretching the skin, but the effects
last only about 5 years.
wrist The joint between the  hand and
the arm that allows the hand to be bent
forward and backward relative to the
arm and also to be moved side to side.
The wrist contains 8 bones (known
collectively as the carpus) arranged in 2
rows, one articulating with the bones of
the forearm, and the other connecting
to the bones of the palm. Tendons con-
nect the forearm muscles to the fingers
and thumb, and arteries and nerves sup-
ply the muscles, bones, and skin of the
hand and fingers.
Wrist injuries may lead to serious dis-
ability by limiting hand movement. A
common injury in adults is Colles＊ frac-
ture, in which the lower end of the radius
is fractured and the wrist and hand are
WRY NECK WOUND INFECTION
W
Lunate
Scaphoid
Trapezium
Trapezoid
Capitate
Hamate
Pisiform
Triquetrum
Ulna
Radius
BONES OF WRIST602
xanthelasma A yellowish deposit of
fatty material that is visible in the skin
around the eyes. Xanthelasmas are com-
mon in elderly people and are usually
of no more than cosmetic importance.
However, in younger people they may
be associated with hyperlipidaemias, in
which there is excess fat in the blood.
Xanthelasmas may be removed, if nec-
essary, by a simple surgical procedure
under a local anaesthetic. Any associated
hyperlipidaemia must also be treated.
(See also xanthomatosis.)
xanthoma A yellowish deposit of fatty
material in the skin, often on the elbow
or buttock. They may be associated with
hyperlipidaemias (see xanthomatosis).
xanthomatosis A condition in which
deposits of yellowish, fatty material
develop in various parts of the body,
particularly in the skin, internal organs,
corneas of the eyes, brain, and tendons.
The deposits may occur only in the eye-
lids (see xanthelasma). A key feature of
xanthomatosis is the tendency for fatty
material to be deposited in the linings
of blood vessels, leading to generalized
atherosclerosis. Xanthomatosis is often
associated with hyperlipidaemias.
Treatment aims to lower the levels of
fats in the blood by means of a diet that
is low in cholesterol and high in poly-
unsaturated fat, and by drug treatment. 
X chromosome A  sex chromosome, of
which every normal female body cell
has a pair. Male body cells have 1 X and
1  Y chromosome; each sperm carries
either an X or a Y chromosome. Abnor-
mal genes located on X chromosomes
cause X-linked disorders.
xeroderma pigmentosum A rare, in-
herited skin disease. The skin is normal
at birth, but  photosensitivity  (extreme
sensitivity to sunlight) causes it to
become dry, wrinkled, freckled, and pre-
maturely aged by about the age of 5.
Noncancerous skin tumours and  skin
cancers also develop. Xeroderma pig-
mentosum is often accompanied by
related eye problems, such as  photo-
phobia and conjunctivitis. 
Treatment of the condition consists of
protecting the skin from sunlight. Skin
cancers are usually treated surgically or
with radiotherapy.
xerophthalmia An eye disorder in which
vitamin A deficiency causes the conjunc-
tiva and cornea to become abnormally
dry. Without treatment, xerophthalmia
may progress to keratomalacia, a condi-
tion in which severe damage is caused
to the cornea.
xerostomia Abnormal dryness of the
mouth, which can cause bad breath and
may predispose the sufferer towards
tooth decay (see caries, dental). Xerosto-
mia is sometimes a symptom of Sj?gren＊s
syndrome. (See also mouth, dry.)
xipamide A thiazide diuretic drug used
to treat  oedema (accumulation of fluid
in tissues) and high blood pressure.
Side effects may include dizziness and
mild gastrointestinal disturbances.
xiphisternum An alternative name for
the xiphoid process, the small, leaf-
shaped projection that forms the lowest
of the 3 parts of the sternum.
X-linked disorders Sex-linked genetic
disorders in which the abnormal gene or
genes (the causative factors) are loca-
ted on the X chromosome.Almost all
affected people are males. Haemophilia,
fragile X syndrome.  and  colour vision
deficiency are examples.
X-rays A form of electromagnetic radia-
tion of short wavelength and high energy.
X-rays are widely used in medicine for
diagnosis and treatment because they
can be used to image bones, organs,
and internal tissues.
X-rays are produced artificially by
bombarding a heavy metal tungsten tar-
get with electrons, in a device known as
an X-ray tube. Low doses of the X-rays
that are emitted are passed through
body tissue and form images on film or
a fluorescent screen. The X-ray image,
also known as a radiograph or roent-
genogram, shows the internal structure
of the area that is being examined.
Dense structures, such as bone, absorb
XANTHELASMA X-RAYS
X
Xproduce high-quality images with the
lowest possible radiation exposure to the
patient. The possibility of genetic dam-
age can be minimized by using a lead
shield to protect the patient＊s reproduc-
tive organs from X-rays. Radiographers
and radiologists wear a  film badge to
monitor their exposure to radiation.
(See also  imaging techniques; radiogra-
phy; radiology.)
X-rays, dental See dental X-rays.
xylitol A naturally occurring carbohydrate
that is only partially absorbed by the
body and is sometimes used as a sweet-
ener by people with diabetes. Xylitol
chewing gum has been shown to reduce
recurrent ear infections in some children.
Excess xylitol may lead to abdominal
discomfort and flatulence.
xylometazoline A  decongestant drug
used in the form of a spray or drops to
relieve nasal congestion caused by a
common cold, sinusitis, or hay fever (see
rhinitis, allergic). Xylometazoline is also
used as an ingredient of eye-drops in the
treatment of allergic conjunctivitis.
Excessive use of xylometazoline may
cause headache, palpitations, or drowsi-
ness.  Long-term use of the drug may
cause nasal congestion to worsen when
treatment is stopped.
X-rays well and appear white on an X-
ray image. Soft tissues, such as muscle,
absorb less and appear grey.
Because X-rays can damage living
cells, especially those that are dividing
rapidly, high doses of radiation are used
for treating cancer (see radiotherapy).
Hollow or fluid-filled parts of the body
often do not show up well on X-ray film
unless they first have a contrast med-
ium (a substance that is opaque to
X-rays) introduced into them. Contrast-
medium X-ray techniques are used to
image the gallbladder (see cholecystogra-
phy),bile ducts (see  cholangiography),
the urinary tract (see  urography),  the
gastrointestinal tract (see barium X-ray
examinations), blood vessels (see angiog-
raphy; venography), and the spinal cord
(see myelography). 
X-rays can be used to obtain an image
of a ※slice§ through an organ or part of
the body by using a technique known as
tomography. More detailed images of a
body slice are produced by combining
tomography with the capabilities of a
computer (see CT scanning).
Large doses of X-rays can be extremely
hazardous, and even small doses carry
some risk (see radiation hazards). Modern
X-ray film, equipment, and techniques
X-RAY
603
XYLOMETAZOLINE X-RAYS, DENTAL
X
X-ray
machine
RibSpineLung
Heart Diaphragm
Beam of
X-rays
X-ray film in
cassette
CHEST X-RAY PROCEDURE
CHEST X-RAY IMAGE
Adjustable
standand is absent in every female body cell.
Each sperm carries either a single X or a
single Y chromosome.
Unlike the X chromosome, the Y chro-
mosome carries little genetic material.
Its major function is to stimulate the
development of the testes in the embryo.
There are no significant diseases related
to abnormalities of the Y chromosome,
but hairy ears is a trait thought to be
determined by a Y-linked gene.
yeasts Types of  fungi in which the body
of the fungus comprises individual cells
that occur either singly, in pairs, or in
longer chains. Certain yeasts can cause
infections of the skin or mucous mem-
branes; the most important of these
disease-causing yeasts is CANDIDA ALBI-
CANS, which causes candidiasis.
yellow fever An infectious disease of
short duration and variable severity that
is caused by a virus transmitted by mos-
quitoes. In severe cases, the skin yellows
due to  jaundice, from which the name
yellow fever derives. The infection may
be spread from monkeys to humans in
forest areas through various species of
mosquito; and in urban areas it can be
transmitted between humans by  AEDES
AEGYPTI mosquitoes. 
Today, yellow fever is contracted only in
Central America, parts of South America,
and a large area of Africa. Eradication of
the causative mosquito from populated
areas has greatly reduced its incidence.
Yellow fever is characterised by a sud-
den onset of fever and headache, often
with nausea and nosebleeds and, despite
the high fever, a very low heart-rate. In
YEASTS
604
yawning An involuntary act, or reflex
action, usually associated with drowsi-
ness or boredom. The mouth is opened
wide and a slow, deep breath is taken
through it in order to draw air into the
lungs. The air is then slowly released.
Yawning is accompanied by a momen-
tary increase in the heart-rate, and, in
many cases, watering of the eyes.
The purpose of yawning is unknown,
but one theory suggests it is triggered
by raised levels of carbon dioxide in the
blood; thus, its purpose could be to
reduce the level of carbon dioxide and
increase that of oxygen in the blood.
yaws An infectious disease that tends
to be found throughout poorer subtrop-
ical and tropical areas of the world.
Yaws is caused by a  spirochaete  (a spi-
ral-shaped bacterium), and it spreads
principally in conditions of poor hygiene.
The infection is almost always acquired
in childhood, and it mainly affects the
skin and bones.
The bacteria enter the body through
abrasions in the skin. Three or 4 weeks
after infection, an itchy,  raspberry-like
growth appears at the site of infection,
sometimes preceded by fever and pains.
Scratching spreads the infection and
causes more growths to develop else-
where on  the skin. Without treatment,
the growths heal slowly over the course
of about 6 months, but recurrence is
common. In about 10 per cent of un-
treated cases, widespread tissue loss
eventually occurs. This may eventually
lead to gross destruction of the skin,
bones, and joints of the legs, nose,
palate and upper jaw.
Yaws can be cured by a single large
dose of a  penicillin drug given as an
injection into muscle.
Y chromosome A sex chromosome that
is present in every normal male body
cell. It is paired with an X chromosome
YAWNING YELLOW FEVER
Y
Y
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
Mitochondrion
Cell wall
YEAST CELL605
more serious cases, the fever is higher
and there is severe headache and pain
in the neck, back, and legs. Damage may
occur rapidly to the liver and kidneys,
causing jaundice and kidney failure. This
may be followed by severe agitation and
delirium, leading to coma and death.
Vaccination confers long-lasting immu-
nity and should always be obtained
before travel to affected areas. A single
injection of the vaccine gives protection
for at least 10 years. Reactions to the
vaccine are rare and are usually trivial,
although children under the age of 1
should not be vaccinated.
During yellow fever epidemics, diag-
nosis is simple. A diagnosis can be
confirmed by carrying out blood tests to
isolate the causative virus or to find
antibodies to the virus.
No drug is effective against the yellow
fever virus; treatment is directed at
maintaining the blood volume. Transfu-
sion of fluids is often necessary. Many
patients recover in about 3 days and, in
mild to moderate cases, complications
are few. Relapses do not occur and one
attack confers lifelong immunity. Overall,
however, about 10 per cent of victims die.
yersinia  A class of bacteria containing
the organism responsible for the bubonic
plague (YERSINIA PESTIS). In other forms,
yersinia is responsible for a variety of
infections, such as  gastroenteritis, par-
ticularly in young children, and arthritis
and septicaemia in adults.
yin and yang The 2 opposing and
interdependent principles that are funda-
mental to traditional  Chinese medicine
and philosophy. Yin is associated with
the female, darkness, coldness, and
quiescence; yang embodies qualities of
maleness, brightness, heat, and activity.
In a healthy body, yin and yang are in
balance. The concepts of yin and yang
are also central to the theoretical basis
of macrobiotics.
yoga A system of Hindu philosophy and
physical discipline that is becoming
increasingly popular throughout the
world. The main form of yoga that is
practised in the West  is hatha-yoga, in
which the follower adopts a series of
poses, called asanas, and uses a special
breathing technique. The practice of
yoga maintains flexibility of the body,
teaches both physical and mental con-
trol, and is a useful relaxation technique.
If attempted by people in poor health,
or practised incorrectly, yoga may pose
certain health hazards, such as back
disorders,  hypertension (high blood
pressure), and glaucoma (increased pres-
surein the eye).
yolk sac The membranous sac, other-
wise known as the vitelline sac, that lies
against, and is attached to, the front of
the embryo during the early stages of its
existence. During development, the sac
decreases proportionately in size to the
body, reducing finally to a narrow duct
that passes through the  umbilicus. The
yolk sac is believed to assist in the trans-
portationof nutrients from the mother
to the early embryo.
yttrium A very rare metal that, in its
radioactive form, is sometimes used in
cancer therapy and to treat joints affec-
ted by arthritis.
YTTRIUM YERSINIA
Y606
zidovudine An  antiretroviral drug, for-
merly known as azidothymidine or AZT,
that is used in combination with other
antiretroviral drugs to slow the progres-
sion of  AIDS. The principal aim of
antiretrovirals is to keep viral replica-
tion to as low a level as possible for as
long as possible; they do not constitute
a cure. Zidovudine was the first drug to
be introduced to combat HIV infection.
Possible side effects of zidovudine
include  anaemia, which may be severe
enough to require a blood transfusion,
nausea, loss of appetite, and headache.
Zidovudine also impairs the absorption
of  trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole,
the antibiotic drugs used to treat pneu-
monia in people who have AIDS, thus
reducing the effectiveness of these drugs.
ZIFT See zygote intrafallopian transfer.
zinc A trace element that is essential for
normal growth, the development of the
reproductive organs, normal functioning
of the prostate gland, healing of wounds,
and the manufacture of  proteins and
nucleic acids in the body. Zinc also con-
trols the activitiesof more  than 100
enzymes and is involved in the func-
tioning of the hormone insulin. 
Particularly rich sources of zinc include
lean meat, wholemeal breads, whole
grain cereals, dried beans, and seafood.
Zinc deficiency is rare. Most cases occur
in people who are generally malnour-
ished. Deficiency may also be caused by
any disorder that causes malabsorption;
acrodermatitis enteropathica; or by in-
creased zinc requirements due to cell
damage (for example, as a result of a
burn or in  sickle cell anaemia). Symp-
toms of deficiency include impairment
of taste and loss of appetite; there may
also be hair loss and inflammation of
the skin, mouth, tongue, and eyelids. In
children, zinc deficiency impairs growth
and delays sexual development.
Prolonged excessive intake of zinc  may
interfere with the intestinal absorption
of  iron and  copper, leading to a defi-
ciency of these minerals.
Zinc compounds, such as  zinc oxide,
are included in many preparations for
treating skin and scalp disorders.
zinc oxide An ingredient of many skin
preparations that has a mild astringent
action and a soothing effect. Zinc oxide
is used to treat painful, itchy, or moist
skin conditions and to ease the pain
caused by haemorrhoids and insect
bites or stings. It also blocks the ultra-
violet rays of the sun (see sunscreens).
Zollinger每Ellison syndrome A rare
condition characterized by severe and
recurrent  peptic ulcers in the stomach,
duodenum, and jejunum (the 2nd part
of the small intestine). Zollinger每Elli-
son syndrome is  caused by 1 or more
tumours in the  pancreas that secrete 
the hormone gastrin. Gastrin stimulates
production of large quantities of acid by
the stomach, which leads to ulceration.
The high levels of acid in the digestive
tract often also cause diarrhoea.
The tumours are cancerous, but of a
slow-growing type. If possible, they are
removed surgically. Proton pump inhib-
itor drugs are given to treat the ulcers.
zolpidem A drug used in the short-term
treatment of  insomnia. Zolpidem has a
brief duration of action and causes little
hangover effect. Side effects include diar-
rhoea, nausea, and dizziness.
zona pellucida  The thick, transparent,
noncellular layer that surrounds a devel-
oping egg cell in the ovarian follicle. At
fertilization, the zona pellucida is pene-
trated by at least 1 sperm.
zoonosis Any infectious or parasitic
disease of animals that can be transmit-
ted to humans. Unlike many disease
organisms, zoonotic organisms are flex-
ible and can adapt themselves to many
different species. 
Zoonoses are usually caught from ani-
mals closely associated with humans,
either as pets, food sources, or scaven-
ging parasites,such as rats. Examples
include  toxocariasis,  cat-scratch fever,
some  fungal infections,  psittacosis,  bru-
cellosis,  trichinosis, and  leptospirosis.
Rabies can infect virtually any mammal,
ZIDOVUDINE ZOONOSIS
Zbut dog bites are a common cause of
human infection worldwide.
Other zoonoses are transmitted from
animals less obviously associated with
humans, usually by insect  vectors. For
example, yellow fever is transmitted by
mosquito bites. (See also dogs, diseases
from; cats, diseases from; rats, dis-
eases from; insects and disease.) 
zopiclone A drug used in the short-term
treatment of insomnia. It has a brief dura-
tion of action and causes little hangover
effect. Side effects include a bitter metal-
lictaste, nausea, and dry mouth.
Z-plasty A technique that is used in
plastic surgery  to change the direction
of a pre-existing scar so that it can be
hidden in natural skin creases, or to
relieve skin tension caused by the con-
tracture of a scar. Z-plasty is especially
useful for revising unsightly scars on
the face and for releasing scarring across
those joints, such as on the fingers or in
the armpits, that may restrict normal
movement or cause deformity.
zygomatic arch The arch of bone,
commonly known as the cheek bone,on
either side of the skull just below the eye
socket. The zygomatic arch is formed of
thezygomatic and temporal bones. 
zygote The cell that is produced when a
sperm fertilizes an ovum. A zygote, mea-
suring about 0.1mm in diameter in
humans, contains all the genetic mat-
erial for a new individual. The zygote is
surrounded by a protein-rich layer
known as the zona pellucida.
ZYGOMATIC ARCH
The zygote travels down 1 of the
woman＊s  fallopian tubes, dividing as it
does so. After about a week, the mass of
cells (now called a blastocyst) implants
into the lining of the uterus, and the next
stage of embryological growth begins.
(See also embryo; fertilization.)
zygote intrafallopian transfer A type
of in vitro fertilization, also referred to as
ZIFT, in which ova are fertilized outside
the body and returned to a  fallopian
tube rather than to the uterus.
ZYGOTE
607
ZYGOTE INTRAFALLOPIAN TRANSFER ZOPICLONE
Frontal
bone
Zygomatic
bone
Parietal bone
Temporal bone
Occipital bone
Zygomatic arch
Mandible
Zona pellucida Zygote608
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
PICTURE CREDITS
Dr D.A.Burns: 374bcl, 469tr; Professor Terry Hamblin, The Royal Bournemouth 
Hospital Medical Illustration Department: 456cr; Dr N. R. Patel: 185cr; Science 
Photo Library: 600bcr; Biophoto Associates 506bl; CNRI 129cr, 250bl; Dr P. Marazzi
67bl, 218br; Eye of Science 284bcr; John Radcliffe Hospital 293tr; National Institute 
of Health 444br; Professor P. Motta/Department of Anatomy/University "La Sapienza",
Rome 423br; National Meningitis Trust: 252cl; St John's Institute of Dermatology:
302br, 361bcr; The Wellcome Institute Library, London: 255cr, 257cl, 325bcl 
All other images copyright ? Dorling Kindersley. 
For further information see: www.dkimages.com
ILLUSTRATORS
Evi Antoniou, Joanna Cameron, Mick Gillah, Tony Graham, Mark Iley,
Deborah Maizels, Patrick Mulrey, Peter Ruane, Richard Tibbitts, 
Halli Verrinder, Philip Wilson, Deborah Woodward, 
PHOTOGRAPHERS
Andy Crawford, Steve Gorton, Gary Ombler, Tim Ridley, 
Spike Walker (microphotography) 
Every effort has been made to acknowledge those individuals, organizations, and
corporations that have helped with this book and to trace copyright holders.
DK apologizes in advance if any omission has occurred. If an omission does come 
to light, the company will be pleased to insert the appropriate acknowledgment 
in any subsequent editions of this book.The only full-colour illustrated dictionarythat
provides authoritative yet accessible definitions
of every important medical term
A每Z quick-reference guide to over 
5,500 medical terms
?
Approximately 400 full-colour images
?
Comprehensive coverage, includinganatomical terms, 
disorders, tests, treatments and drugs 
?
Expanded definitions for fuller understanding
?
Extensive cross-referencing for fast access 
to related topics 
?
Illustrations labelled to show key features 
The British Medical Association
seeourcomplete catalogueat
www.dk.com ㏒12.99
ILLUSTRATED
MEDICAL
DICTIONARY